[Image]----------------------------------------------------------------------------Uncommonly Well Informed.Born in Budapest, Hungary in 1930, George Soros emigrated to England in 1947and graduated from the London School of Economics in 1952. He moved to theUnited States in 1956 where he amassed his fortune in an investment fund hefounded and managed.His status as an international philantropist dates to 1979 when he foundedthe Open Society Fund, followed by the Soros Foundation-Hungary in 1984 andthe Soros Foundation-Soviet Union in 1987. He now manages a network offoundations operating in 21 Central and Eastern European countries as wellas one in South Africa. With the collapse of communism and the striving forthe freedoms of an open society, the foundations help promote the ideals ofdemocracy, individual freedoms snd free market systems.Mr. Soros is also the founder of The Central European University in Budapestand Prague. Established in 1990, the University offers postgraduate programsin history, economics, political science, art history and the socialsciences, and servers as the centerpiece of Mr. Soros' educationalinitiatives in Eastern Europe.In addition to these many charitable institutions, Mr. Sorors is Presidentof Soros Fund Management, New York, and Chief Investment Advisor to QuantumFund N.V., a $2.5 billion international investment fund generally recognizedfor the best fund performance record in the world during its 24-yearhistory.His writings include many articles on the political and economic changes inEastern Europe and the former Soviet Union. Mr. Soros is also the author ofThe Alchemy of Finance, published by Simon & Schuster in 1987, Opening theSoviet System, published by Weidenfeld & Nicholson in July 1990, andUnderwriting Democracy, published by the Free Press in September 1991.Mr. Soros received honorary doctoral degrees from the New School for SocialResearch (New York) and the University of Oxford in 1990, as well as fromthe Budapest University of Economics and Yale University in 1991.In December 1993 Mr. Soros was presented with the Annual Public ServiceAward by the Federation of American Scientists in recognition of hisphilanthropy in the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. The formalcitation reads, in part: "In all these...efforts, Soros philanthropy hasunique advantages of being overseen: by a single knowledgeable person,rather than a committee; by a person who is a philosopher manquê, with anative undestanding of Europe; by an economist with a related incisiveundestanding of people and events; and by a person of proven enterprise andreinforced self-confidence who combines sophisticated idealism withpragmatism. His philanthropy keeps him uncommonly well informed."----------------------------------------------------------------------------