Young ZaphodYoung Zaphod Plays It Safe
_______________________________ 
A Hitch-Hikers Guide to the Galxy Short Story 

by Douglas Adams 

Extracted from 
The Utterly Utterly Merry Comic Relief Christmas Book 
__________



A large flying craft moved swiftly across the surface of an astoundingly 
beautiful sea. From mid-morning onwards it plied back and forth in great 
widening arcs, and at last attracted the attention of the local islanders, a 
peaceful, sea-food loving people who gathered on the beach and squinted up into 
the blinding sun, trying to see what was there. 
Any sophisticated knowledgeable person, who had knocked about, seen a few 
things, would probably have remarked on how much the craft looked like a filing 
cabinet - a large and recently burgled filing cabinet lying on its back with its 
drawers in the air and flying. 
The islanders, whose experience was of a different kind, were instead struck by 
how little it looked like a lobster. 
They chattered excitedly about its total lack of claws, its stiff unbendy back, 
and the fact that it seemed to experience the greatest difficulty staying on the 
ground. This last feature seemed particularly funny to them. They jumped up and 
down on the spot a lot to demonstrate to the stupid thing that they themselves 
found staying on the ground the easiest thing in the world. 
But soon this entertainment began to pall for them. After all, since it was 
perfectly clear to them that the thing was not a lobster, and since their world 
was blessed with an abundance of things that were lobsters (a good half a dozen 
of which were now marching succulently up the beach towards them) they saw no 
reason to waste any more time on the thing but decided to adjourn immediately 
for a late lobster lunch. 
At that exact moment the craft stopped suddenly in mid-air then upended itself 
and plunged headlong into the ocean with a great crash of spray which sent them 
shouting into the trees. 
When they re-emerged, nervously, a few minutes later, all they were able to see 
was a smoothly scarred circle of water and a few gulping bubbles. That's odd, 
they said to each other between mouthfuls of the best lobster to be had anywhere 
in the Western Galaxy, that's the second time that's happened in a year. 
---------- 
The craft which wasn't a lobster dived direct to a depth of two hundred feet and 
hung there in the heavy blueness, while vast masses of water swayed about it. 
High above, where the water was magically clear, a brilliant formation of fish 
flashed away. Below, where the light had difficulty reaching, the colour of the 
water sank to a dark savage blue. 
Here, at two hundred feet, the sun streamed feebly. A large, silk-skinned sea 
mammal rolled idly by, as if it had half expected to find something of this kind 
round about here, and then it slid on up and away towards the rippling light. 
The craft waited here for a minute or two, taking readings, and then descended 
another hundred feet. At this depth it was becoming seriously dark. After a 
moment or two the internal lights of the craft shut down, and in the second or 
so that passed before the main external beams suddenly stabbed out, the only 
visible light came from a small hazily illuminated pink sign which read The 
Beeblebrox Salvage and Really Wild Stuff Corporation The huge beams switched 
downwards, catching a vast shoal of silver fish, which swiveled away in silent 
panic. 
In the dim control room which extended in a broad bow from the craft's blunt 
prow, four heads were gathered round a computer display that was analyzing the 
very, very faint and intermittent signals that were emanating from deep on the 
sea bed. 
"That's it" said the owner of one of the heads finally. 
"Can we be quite sure?" said the owner of another of the heads. 
"One hundred per cent positive," replied the owner of the first head. 
"You're one hundred per cent positive that the ship which is crashed on the 
bottom of this ocean is the ship which you said you were one hundred per cent 
positive could one hundred per cent positively never crash?" said the owner of 
the two remaining heads. "Hey" he put up two of his hands, "I'm only asking" 
The two officials from the Safety and Civil Reassurance Administration responded 
to this with a very cold stare, but the man with the odd, or rather the even 
number of heads, missed it. He flung himself back on the pilot couch, opened a 
couple of beers one for himself and the other also for himself stuck his feet on 
the console and said "Hey, baby through the ultra-glass at a passing fish. 
"Mr. Beeblebrox ... " began the shorter and less reassuring of the two officials 
in a low voice. "Yup?" said Zaphod, rapping a suddenly empty can down on some of 
the more sensitive instruments, "you ready to dive? Let's go" 
"Mr. Beeblebrox, let us make one thing perfectly clear. 
"Yeah let's" said Zaphod, "How about this for a start. Why don't you just tell 
me what s really on this ship?" 
"We have told you:' said the official. "By-products" 
Zaphod exchanged weary glances with himself. "By-products" he said. "By-products 
of what?" 
"Processes, " said the official." 
What processes?" 
"Processes that are perfectly safe" 
Santa Zarquana Voostra!" exclaimed both of Zaphod s heads in chorus, "so safe 
that you have to build a zarking fortress ship to take the by-products to the 
nearest black hole and tip them in! Only it doesn't get there because the pilot 
does a detour - is this right?- to pick up some lobster . . .? OK, so the guy IS 
COOL, but . . . I mean own up, this is barking time, this is major lunch, this 
is stool approaching critical mass this is . . . this is . . . total vocabulary 
failure!" 
Shut up!" his right head yelled at his left, "we're flanging! 
He got a good calming grip on the remaining beer "Listen guys ' he resumed after 
a moment's peace and contemplation. The two officials had said nothing. 
Conversation at this level was not something to which they felt they could 
aspire. "I just want to know" insisted Zaphod, "what you're getting me into." 
He stabbed a finger at the intermittent readings trickling over the computer 
screen. They meant nothing to him but he didn't like the look of them at all. 
They were all squiggly with lots of long numbers and things. 
"It's breaking up, is that it?" he shouted. "It's got a hold full of epsilonic 
radiating aorist rods or something that'll fry this whole space sector for 
zillions of years back and it's breaking up. Is that the story? Is that what 
we're going down to find? Am I going to come out of that wreck with even more 
heads?" 
"It cannot possibly be a wreck, Mr. Beeblebrox ' insisted the official, "the 
ship is guaranteed to be perfectly safe It cannot possibly break up" 
"Then why are you so keen to go and look at it?" 
"We like to look at things that are perfectly safe." 
"Freeeooow!" 
"Mr. Breeblebrox ' said an official, patiently, "may I remind you that you have 
a job to do?" 
"Yeah, well maybe I don't feel so keen on doing it all of a sudden. What do you 
think I am, completely without any moral whatsits, what are they called those 
moral things?" 
"Scruples?" 
"Scruples, thank you, whatsoever? Well?" 
The two officials waited calmly. They coughed slightly to help pass the time. 
Zaphod sighed a "what is the world coming to" sort of sigh to absolve himself 
from all blame, and swung himself round in his seat. 
"Ship?" he called. 
"Yup?" said the ship. 
"Do what I do" 
The ship thought about this for a few milliseconds and then, after double 
checking all the seals on its heavy duty bulkheads, it began slowly, inexorably, 
in the hazy blaze of its lights, to sink to the lowest depths. 
Five hundred feet. 
A thousand. 
Two thousand. 
Here, at a pressure of nearly seventy atmospheres, in the chilling depths where 
no light reaches, nature keeps its most heated imaginings. Two foot long 
nightmares loomed wildly into the bleaching light, yawned, and vanished back 
into the blackness. 
Two and a half thousand feet. 
At the dim edges of the ship's lights guilty secrets flitted by with their eyes 
on stalks. 
Gradually the topography of the distantly approaching ocean bed resolved with 
greater and greater clarity on the computer displays until at last a shape could 
be made out that was separate and distinct from its surroundings. It was like a 
huge lopsided cylindrical fortress which widened sharply halfway along its 
length to accommodate the heavy ultra-plating with which the crucial storage 
hold s were clad, and which were supposed by its builders to have made this the 
most secure and impregnable spaceship ever built. Before launch the material 
structure of this section had been battered, rammed, blasted and subjected to 
every assault it's builders knew it could withstand in order to demonstrate that 
it could withstand them. 
The tense silence in the cockpit tightened perceptibly as it became clear that 
it was this section that had broken rather neatly in two. "In fact it's 
perfectly safe," said one of the officials, "it's built so that even if the ship 
does break up, the storage holds cannot possibly be breached" 
Three thousand, eight hundred and twenty-five feet. 
Four Hi-Presh-A Smart Suits moved slowly out of the open hatchway of the salvage 
craft and waded through the barrage of its lights towards the monstrous shape 
that loomed darkly out of the sea night. They moved with a sort of clumsy grace, 
near weightless though weighed on by a world of water. With his right-hand head 
Zaphod peered up into the black immensities above him and for a moment is mind 
sang with a silent roar of horror. He glanced to his left and was relieved to 
see that his other head was busy watching the Brockian Ultra-Cricket broadcasts 
on the helmet vid without concern. Slightly behind him to his left walked the 
two officials from the Safety and Civil Reassurance Administration, slightly in 
front of him to his right walked the empty suit, carrying their implements and 
testing the way for them. 
They passed the huge rift in the broken-backed Starship Billion Year Bunker, and 
played their flashlights up into it. Mangled machinery loomed between torn and 
twisted bulkheads, two feet thick. A family of large transparent eels lived in 
there now and seemed to like it. The empty suit preceded them along the length 
of the ship's gigantic murky hull, trying the airlocks. The third one it tested 
ground open uneasily. They crowded inside it and waited for several long minutes 
while the pump mechanisms dealt with the hideous pressure that the ocean 
exerted, and slowly replaced it with the equally hideous pressure of air and 
inert gases. At last the inner door slid open and they were admitted to a dark 
outer holding area of the Starship Billion Year Bunker. 
Several more high security Titan-O-Hold doors had to be passed through, each of 
which the officials opened with a selection of quark keys. Soon they were so 
deep within the heavy security fields that the Ultra Cricket broadcasts were 
beginning to fade, and Zaphod had to switch to one of the rock video stations, 
since there was nowhere that they were not able to reach. 
A final doorway slid open, and they emerged into a large sepulchral space. 
Zaphod played his flashlight against the opposite wall and it fell full on a 
wild-eyed screaming face. 
Zaphod screamed a diminished fifth himself, dropped his light and sat heavily on 
the floor, or rather on a body which had been lying there undisturbed for around 
six months and which reacted to being sat on by exploding with great violence. 
Zaphod wondered what to do about all this, and after a brief but hectic internal 
debate decided that passing out would be the very thing 
He came to a few minutes later and pretended not to know who he was, where he 
was or how he had got there, but was not able to convince anybody. He then 
pretended that his memory suddenly returned with a rush and that the shock 
caused him to pass out again, but he was helped unwillingly to his feet by the 
empty suit - which he was beginning to take a serious dislike to and forced to 
come to terms with his surroundings. 
They were dimly and fitfully lit and unpleasant in a number of respects, the 
most obvious of which was the colourful arrangement of parts of the ship's 
lamented Navigation Officer over the floor, walls an ceiling, and especially 
over the lower half of his, Zaphod's, suit. The effect of this was so 
astoundingly nasty that we shall not be referring to it again at any point in 
this narrative-other than to record briefly the fact that it caused Zaphod to 
throw up inside his suit, which he therefore removed and swapped, after suitable 
headgear modifications, with the empty one. Unfortunately the stench of the 
fetid air in the ship, followed by the sight of his own suit walking around 
casually draped in rotting intestines was enough to make him throw up in the 
other suit as well, which was problem that he and the suit would simply have to 
live with. 
There. All done. No more nastiness. 
At least, no more of that particular nastiness. 
The owner of the screaming face had calmed down very slightly now and was 
bubbling away incoherently in a large tank of yellow liquid - an emergency 
suspension tank. "It was crazy, " he babbled, "crazy! I told him we could always 
try the lobster on the way back, but he was crazy. Obsessed! Do you ever get 
like that about lobster? Because I don't. Seems to me it's all rubbery and 
fiddly to eat, and not that much taste, well I mean is there? I infinitely 
prefer scallops, and said so. Oh Zarquon, I said so!" 
Zaphod stared at this extraordinary apparition flailing in its tank. The man was 
attached to all kinds of life-support tubes, and his voice was bubbling out of 
speakers that echoed insanely round the ship, returning as haunting echoes from 
deep and distant corridors. 
"That was where I went wrong " the madman yelled, "I actually said that I 
preferred scallops and he said it was because I hadn't had real lobster like 
they did where his ancestors came from, which was here, and he'd prove it. He 
said it was no problem, he said the lobster here was worth a whole journey, let 
alone the small diversion it would take to get here, and he swore he could 
handle the ship in the atmosphere, but it was madness, madness!" he screamed, 
and paused with his eyes rolling, as if the word had rung some kind of bell in 
his mind. "The ship went right out of control! I couldn't believe what we were 
doing and just to prove a point about lobster which is really so overrated as a 
food, I'm sorry to go on about lobsters so much, I'll try and stop in a minute, 
but they've been on my mind so much for the months I've been in this tank, can 
you imagine what it's like to be stuck in a ship with the same guys for months 
eating junk food when all one guy will talk about is lobster and then spend six 
months floating by yourself in a tank thinking about it. I promise I will try 
and shut up about the lobsters, I really will. Lobsters, lobsters, lobsters - 
enough! I think I'm the only survivor. I'm the only one who managed to get to an 
emergency tank before we went down. I sent out the Mayday and then we hit. It's 
a disaster isn't it? A total disaster, and all because the guy liked lobsters. 
How much sense am I making? It's really hard for me to tell" 
He gazed at them beseechingly, and his mind seemed to sway slowly back down to 
earth like a falling leaf. He blinked and looked at them oddly like monkey 
peering at a strange fish. He scrabbled curiously with his wrinkled up fingers 
at the glass side of the tank. Tiny, thick yellow bubbles loosed themselves from 
his mouth and nose, caught briefly in his swab of hair and strayed on upwards. 
"Oh Zarquon, oh heavens" he mumbled pathetically to himself, "I've been found. 
I've been rescued . . " 
"Well" said one of the officials, briskly, "you've been found at least" He 
strode over to the main computer bank in the middle of the chamber and started 
checking quickly through the ship's main monitor circuits for damage reports. 
"The aorist rod chambers are intact ' he said. 
"Holy dingo's dos" snarled Zaphod, "there are aorist rods on board . . !" 
Aorist rods were devices used in a now happily abandoned form of energy 
production. When the hunt for new sources of energy had at one point got 
particularly frantic, one bright young chap suddenly spotted that one place 
which had never used up all its available energy was the past. And with the 
sudden rush of blood to the head that such insights tent to induce, he invented 
a way of mining it that very same night, and within a year huge tracts of the 
past were being drained of all their energy and simply wasting away. Those who 
claimed that the past should be left unspoilt were accused of indulging in an 
extreme expensive form of sentimentality. The past provided a very cheap, 
plentiful and clean source of energy, there could always be a few Natural Past 
Reserves set up if anyone wanted to pay for their upkeep, and as for the claim 
that draining the past impoverished the present, well, maybe it did, slightly, 
but the effects were immeasurable and you really had to keep a sense of 
proportion. 
It was only when it was realized that the present was being impoverished, and 
that the reason for it was that those selfish plundering wastrel bastards up in 
the future were doing exactly the same thing, that everyone realized that every 
single aorist rod, and the terrible secret of how they were made, would have to 
utterly and forever destroyed for the sake of their grandparents and 
grandchildren, but it was of course for the sake of their grandparent's 
granchildren and grandchildren's grandparents. 
The official from the Safety and Civil Reassurance Administration gave a 
dismissive shrug. "They're perfectly safe" he said. He glanced up at Zaphod and 
suddenly said with uncharacteristic frankness, "There's worse than that on 
board. At least" he added, tapping at one of the computer screens, "I hope it's 
on board" 
The other official rounded on him sharply. "What the hell do you think you're 
saying? " he snapped. 
The first shrugged again. He said, "It doesn't matter. He can say what he likes. 
No one would believe him. It's why we chose to use him rather than do anything 
official isn't it? The more wild the story he tells, the more it'll sound like 
he's some hippy adventurer making it up. He can even say that we said this and 
it'll make him sound like a paranoid" He smiled pleasantly at Zaphod, who was 
seething in a suit full of sick. "You may accompany us " he told him, "if you 
wish" 
"You see?" said the official, examining the ultra titanium outer seals of the 
aorist rod hold. "Perfectly secure, perfectly safe." 
He said the same thing as they passed holds containing chemical weapons so 
powerful that a tea-spoon could fatally infect an entire planet. 
He said the same thing as they passed holds containing zeta-active compounds so 
powerful that a teaspoonful could blow up a whole planet 
He said the same thing as they passed holds containing theta-active compounds so 
powerful that a teaspoonful could irradiate a whole planet 
"I'm glad I'm not a planet" muttered Zaphod 
"You'd have nothing to fear" assured the official from the Safety and Civil 
Reassurance Administration, "planets are very safe. Provided" he added and 
paused. 
They were approaching the hold nearest to the point where the back of the 
Starship Billion Year Bunker was broken. The corridor here was twisted and 
deformed, and the floor was damp and sticky in patches. 
"Ho hum," he said, "ho very much hum" 
"What's in this hold?" demanded Zaphod. 
"By-products" said the official, clamming up again. 
"By-products . . " insisted Zaphod, quietly. "of what?" 
Neither official answered. Instead, they examined the hold door very carefully 
and saw that its seals were twisted apart by the forces that had deformed the 
whole corridor. One of them touched the door lightly. It swung open to his touch 
. There was darkness inside, with just a couple of dim yellow lights deep within 
it. 
"Of what?" hissed Zaphod. 
The leading official turned to the other. "There's an escape capsule" he said, 
"that the crew were to use to abandon ship before jettisoning it into the black 
hole," he said. "I think it would be good to know that it's still there" The 
other official nodded and left without a word. 
The first official quietly beckoned Zaphod in. The large dim yellow lights 
glowed about twenty feet from of them. 
"The reason ' he said, quietly, "why everything else in this ship is, I 
maintain, safe, is that no one is really crazy enough to use them. No one. At 
least no one that crazy would ever get near them. Anyone that mad or dangerous 
rings very deep alarm bells. People may be stupid but they're not that stupid" 
"By-products" hissed Zaphod again he had to hiss in order that his voice 
shouldn't be heard to tremble - "of what" 
"Er, Designer People" 
"What?" 
"The Sirius Cybernetics Corporation were awarded a huge research grant to design 
and produce synthetic personalities to order. The results were uniformly 
disastrous. All the 'people' and 'personalities' turned out to be amalgams of 
characteristics which simply could not co-exist in naturally occurring life 
forms. Most of them were just poor pathetic misfits, but some were deeply, 
deeply dangerous. Dangerous because they didn't ring alarm bells in other 
people. They could walk through situations the way that ghosts walk through 
walls, because no one spotted the danger 
"The most dangerous of all were three identical ones. They were put in this 
hold, to be blasted, with this ship, right out of this universe. They are not 
evil, in fact they are rather simple and charming. But they are the most 
dangerous creatures that ever lived because there is nothing they will not do if 
allowed, and nothing they will not be allowed to do . . . " 
Zaphod looked at the dim yellow lights, the two dim yellow lights. As his eyes 
became accustomed to the light he saw that the two lights framed a third space 
where something was broken. Wet sticky patches gleamed dully on the floor. 
Zaphod and the official walked cautiously towards the light. At that moment, 
four words came crashing into the helmet headsets from the other official. 
"The capsule has gone" he said tersely 
"Trace it" snapped Zaphod's companion. "Find exactly where it has gone. We must 
know where it has gone!" 
Zaphod slid aside a large round glass door. Beyond it lay a tank full of thick 
yellow liquid, and floating in it was a man, a kindly looking man with lots of 
pleasant laugh lines round his face. He seemed to be floating quite contentedly 
and smiling to himself. Another terse message suddenly came through his helmet 
headset. The planet towards which the escape capsule had headed had already been 
identified. It was in Galactic Sector ZZ9 Plural Z Alpha. 
The kindly looking man in the tank seemed to be babbling gently to himself, just 
as the co-pilot had been in his tank. Little yellow bubbles beaded on the man's 
lips. Zaphod found a small speaker by the tank and turned it on. He heard the 
man babbling gently about a shining city on a hill. 
He also heard the official from the Safety and Civil Reassurance Administration 
issue instructions that the planet in ZZ9 Plural Z Alpha must be made "perfectly 
safe." 


