The Long Dark Tea-Time of the Soul 
Douglas Adams (1988)
========================================================================
Notes:

1. This  text file was converted  from MS Word 7.0 .doc file of the same
book. 
2. This file, I think, is in  ANSI format (Windows Charset). If you view
this  file in  DOS  you will probably see some  strange characters.  The
file was saved as ANSI  to save some special  characters in the text. It
can be freely viewed with Courier New font  (but Fixedsys might give you
problems). There's no problem viewing the file  from Netscape Navigator.
3. The  italics  of  the  original  text have been  kept  by putting the
italicised text between ‘/’  characters, i.e. when  you see /xxx/,  then
xxx is supposed to be italics.  If it disturbs you you can simply remove
all  the  ‘/’  characters  from  the text, because  they  don't  show up
anywhere else (use Replace in your text editor). 
4. The alignment is set to  72  characters. If  it  disturbs you,  then,
well, get the version without line breaks and use word wrap!
5. The orignal .doc file was corrected: compared with the book (Pan)  in
some places, and spell checked. 
6. Last Edited 05Aug1997. File Version 1.02c
7. Some  statistics of the original .doc file: about 75,000 words, about
2100 paragraphs. Takes about 100 pages  with Courier New size 9,  on  an
A4 page. 
8. IF YOU LIKE THIS BOOK, *BUY IT!* GOOD AUTHORS DESERVE THAT. 
9. Enjoy!

buffer
========================================================================
Douglas Adams

The Long Dark Tea-Time of the Soul
----------------------------------


For Jane


[::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::]

   This book was  written  and typeset  on an Apple Macintosh II and  an
Apple LaserWriter  II NTX.  The word  processing software was  FullWrite
Professional from Ashton Tate. The final  proofing  and photosetting was
done by The Last Word, London SW6.  
   
   I  would  like to  say  an  enormous  thank  you  to my  amazing  and
wonderful editor, Sue Freestone. 
   Her   help,   support,  criticism,   encouragement,  enthusiasm   and
sandwiches have  been beyond measure. I also owe thanks and apologies to
Sophie, James  and  Vivian  who saw  so  little of her during  the final
weeks of work. 
   
   
[::: CHAPTER 1 ::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::]
   
   It  can  hardly be a coincidence  that no language  on Earth has ever
produced the expression ‘as pretty as an airport’. 
   Airports  are ugly.  Some  are  very  ugly.  Some attain a degree  of
ugliness that can  only be the result of a special effort. This ugliness
arises because airports  are full of people  who are  tired, cross,  and
have  just   discovered  that  their  luggage  has  landed  in  Murmansk
(Murmansk  airport  is  the  only  known  exception  to  this  otherwise
infallible  rule), and  architects have  on the whole  tried  to reflect
this in their designs. 
   They  have sought to highlight the tiredness and crossness motif with
brutal  shapes  and nerve  jangling  colours,  to  make  effortless  the
business  of separating the  traveller  for ever from his or her luggage
or  loved ones, to confuse  the  traveller with arrows  that  appear  to
point at the windows,  distant tie  racks, or the  current  position  of
Ursa Minor  in  the night  sky,  and  wherever  possible to  expose  the
plumbing on the  grounds that it is functional, and conceal the location
of the departure gates, presumably on the grounds that they are not. 
   Caught in  the middle of a sea of hazy light and a sea of hazy noise,
Kate Schechter stood and doubted. 
   All the way out  of London  to  Heathrow she had suffered from doubt.
She was not a superstitious person, or even a religious person,  she was
simply someone who was not at  all sure she should be flying to  Norway.
But she was  finding it increasingly easy to  believe that God, if there
was a  God,  and if it  was remotely possible that any godlike being who
could  order  the  disposition of  particles  at  the  creation  of  the
Universe  would also  be interested in directing traffic on the M4,  did
not want  her to fly to Norway either. All the trouble with the tickets,
finding a next-door neighbour to  look after the  cat, then  finding the
cat  so it could  be looked after by the next-door neighbour, the sudden
leak in the roof,  the missing wallet, the weather, the unexpected death
of  the next-door neighbour, the pregnancy of the cat --  it all had the
semblance  of an orchestrated campaign of obstruction which had begun to
assume godlike proportions. 
   Even  the taxi-driver -- when she had eventually found a  taxi -- had
said,  ‘Norway? What  you  want  to go  there  for?’ And when she hadn’t
instantly said,  ‘The  aurora  borealis!’  or ‘Fjords!’ but  had  looked
doubtful  for a moment and bitten her lip,  he had said,  ‘I know, I bet
it’s some  bloke  dragging  you  out there. Tell  you what,  tell him to
stuff it. Go to Tenerife.’ 
   There was an idea. 
   Tenerife. 
   Or even, she dared to think for a fleeting second, home. 
   She had  stared dumbly out of the taxi window at the angry tangles of
traffic and  thought that  however  cold  and miserable the weather  was
here, that was nothing to what it would be like in Norway. 
   Or, indeed, at  home. Home would be about as icebound as Norway right
now. Icebound, and  punctuated with geysers of steam bursting out of the
ground,  catching in the frigid air and dissipating between  the glacial
cliff faces of Sixth Avenue. 
   A quick glance at the itinerary  Kate  had pursued in  the  course of
her thirty years would reveal her without any  doubt to be a New Yorker.
For though she had lived  in the city very little, most of her  life had
been  spent  at a constant distance from it. Los Angeles, San Francisco,
Europe, and  a  period of distracted wandering around South America five
years  ago following the loss of her newly married husband,  Luke,  in a
New York taxi-hailing accident. 
   She enjoyed the notion  that New  York  was home, and that she missed
it,  but  in fact the  only thing  she really missed was  pizza. And not
just  any old pizza, but the sort of  pizza they brought to your door if
you phoned  them up and  asked them to. That  was the  only  real pizza.
Pizza that  you had to go out  and sit at a table  staring at  red paper
napkins  for wasn’t real pizza however much extra  pepperoni and anchovy
they put on it. 
   London was  the place  she  liked living in  most,  apart, of course,
from the  pizza problem, which drove her crazy. Why would no one deliver
pizza?  Why did  no one understand  that it was fundamental to the whole
nature of  pizza that it arrived at  your front door in a  hot cardboard
box? That  you slithered  it out  of  greaseproof paper and  ate  it  in
folded slices in front of the TV? What was  the  fundamental flaw in the
stupid,  stuck-up,  sluggardly  English  that  they couldn’t grasp  this
simple principle?  For  some odd reason  it was the  one frustration she
could  never  learn simply to  live with  and accept,  and about  once a
month or so  she  would  get very  depressed, phone a pizza  restaurant,
order the  biggest, most lavish  pizza she  could describe -- pizza with
an  extra  pizza on it, essentially  --  and  then, sweetly, ask them to
deliver it. 
   ‘To what?’ 
   ‘Deliver. Let me give you the address --’ 
   ‘I don’t understand. Aren’t you going to come and pick it up?’ 
   ‘No. Aren’t you going to deliver? My address --’ 
   ‘Er, we don’t do that, miss.’ 
   ‘Don’t do what?’ 
   ‘Er, deliver...’ 
   ‘You /don’t deliver/? Am I /hearing you correctly/...?’ 
   The exchange  would  quickly degenerate  into an ugly  slanging match
which would leave her  feeling drained and shaky, but much,  much better
the following  morning. In all other respects she  was  one  of the most
sweet-natured people you could hope to meet. 
   But today was testing her to the limit. 
   There had  been terrible traffic jams  on the motorway, and when  the
distant  flash  of blue  lights  made  it  clear  that the  cause was an
accident  somewhere ahead of  them Kate had  become  more  tense and had
stared  fixedly out of the  other  window as eventually they had crawled
past it. 
   The taxi-driver  had been bad-tempered when at  last he  had  dropped
her off because she didn’t  have the right money, and there was a lot of
disgruntled  hunting  through  tight   trouser  pockets  before  he  was
eventually able  to  find change for  her.  The atmosphere was heavy and
thundery and now, standing in the middle of the main check-in  concourse
at Terminal  Two, Heathrow Airport, she could not find the check-in desk
for her flight to Oslo. 
   She stood  very  still for a moment, breathing calmly and deeply  and
trying not to think of Jean-Philippe. 
   Jean-Philippe  was,  as  the  taxi-driver  had correctly guessed, the
reason why she was going to Norway, but was also  the reason why she was
convinced that  Norway was  not at all  a  good  place for  her  to  go.
Thinking of him therefore  made her  head  oscillate and it seemed  best
not  to think about him at all but simply to go to Norway as if that was
where  she happened  to  be going  anyway. She would  then  be  terribly
surprised  to bump  into him at whatever hotel it was he  had written on
the card that was tucked into the side pocket of her handbag. 
   In fact she would be  surprised  to find him there anyway.  What  she
would be much more likely  to find was a message from him saying that he
had been unexpectedly  called away to Guatemala,  Seoul or Tenerife  and
that  he  would   call  her  from  there.  Jean-Philippe  was  the  most
continually  absent  person  she  had  ever  met.  In  this he  was  the
culmination of a series.  Since  she had  lost Luke to the  great yellow
Chevrolet she had  been  oddly dependent  on  the rather vacant emotions
that a succession of self-absorbed men had inspired in her. 
   She tried to  shut all  this out of her mind, and  even shut her eyes
for a  second. She wished that when she opened them again there would be
a  sign in front  of her saying ‘This  way for  Norway’ which  she could
simply follow without needing to  think  about it or anything else  ever
again. This, she reflected,  in a  continuation of her earlier  train of
thought, was  presumably how religions  got  started,  and  must be  the
reason  why so many sects  hang  around  airports looking  for converts.
They know that people there are at their  most vulnerable and perplexed,
and ready to accept any kind of guidance. 
   Kate opened  her  eyes  again  and was, of course,  disappointed. But
then  a  second  or two  later there was  a momentary  parting in a long
surging wave  of cross  Germans  in inexplicable yellow polo  shirts and
through it  she  had  a  brief glimpse of  the  check-in desk for  Oslo.
Lugging her  garment bag  on to her shoulder, she  made her  way towards
it. 
   There was just one other person  before her  in the line  at the desk
and he, it turned out, was having trouble or perhaps making it. 
   He was  a large  man,  impressively  large  and  well-built  --  even
expertly  built --  but he was also definitely odd-looking in a way that
Kate couldn’t quite deal with.  She couldn’t  even say what it  was that
was  odd about  him,  only that  she was  immediately  inclined  not  to
include him  on  her  list of things  to  think about at the moment. She
remembered  reading  an  article which  had explained  that the  central
processing  unit  of  the  human  brain only had seven memory registers,
which meant that if you had seven things in your mind  at the same  time
and  then  thought  of something  else,  one of  the other  seven  would
instantly drop out. 
   In  quick succession she thought about whether or not she was  likely
to catch  the plane, about whether it  was just her imagination that the
day  was  a particularly  bloody  one, about  airline  staff  who  smile
charmingly and are breathtakingly rude, about Duty Free shops which  are
able  to  charge   much  lower  prices   than  ordinary   shops  but  --
mysteriously -- don’t, about whether or not she  felt a magazine article
about  airports  coming  on which might  help pay  for  the trip,  about
whether  her garment  bag  would  hurt  less on  her other shoulder  and
finally, in  spite of all her  intentions  to  the contrary, about Jean-
Philippe,  who  was  another  set of  at  lest  seven subtopics  all  to
himself. 
   The  man  standing arguing in front of her  popped right  out  of her
mind. 
   It was  only  the announcement on the airport Tannoy of the last call
for her flight to  Oslo which forced her attention back to the situation
in front of her. 
   The large man was making  trouble about the fact that he hadn’t  been
given a first class seat reservation.  It had just transpired  that  the
reason for this was that he didn’t in fact have a first class ticket. 
   Kate’s spirits  sank to  the very  bottom of her being  and  began to
prowl around there making a low growling noise. 
   It  now transpired that  the man in front of her didn’t actually have
a  ticket at all, and the  argument  then  began  to  range  freely  and
angrily  over such  topics  as the physical  appearance  of the  airline
check-in girl, her qualities as a person, theories about  her ancestors,
speculations as to what surprises  the  future might have  in store  for
her and the airline for which she  worked,  and finally lit by chance on
the happy subject of the man’s credit card. 
   He didn’t have one. 
   Further discussions  ensued,  and had to do with cheques, and why the
airline did not accept them. 
   Kate took a long, slow, murderous look at her watch. 
   ‘Excuse me,’ she said, interrupting the  transactions. ‘Is this going
to take long? I have to catch the Oslo flight.’ 
   ‘I’m just dealing with this gentleman,’ said the girl,  ‘I’ll be with
you in just one second.’ 
   Kate nodded, and politely allowed just one second to go by. 
   ‘It’s just  that the flight’s about to leave,’ she said then. ‘I have
one bag, I have  my  ticket,  I  have a  reservation. It’ll  take  about
thirty  seconds. I hate to  interrupt, but I’d hate even more to miss my
flight  for the sake of  thirty  seconds.  That’s thirty actual seconds,
not thirty “just one” seconds, which could keep us here all night.’ 
   The check-in  girl  turned the full glare on her lipgloss on to Kate,
but before she could  speak the large  blond man  looked round, and  the
effect of his face was a little disconcerting. 
   ‘I,  too,’ he  said in  a slow, angry Nordic  voice, ‘wish to fly  to
Oslo.’ 
   Kate stared at him. He looked thoroughly out of place  in an airport,
or rather, the airport looked thoroughly out of place around him. 
   ‘Well,’ she  said, ‘the way we’re  stacked up at the  moment it looks
like neither of us is going to  make it. Can we just sort  this one out?
What’s the hold-up?’ 
   The  check-in girl  smiled  her charming,  dead smile and  said, ‘The
airline does not accept cheques, as a matter of company policy.’ 
   ‘Well I  do,’ said  Kate, slapping down her  own credit card. ‘Charge
the gentleman’s ticket to this, and I’ll take a cheque from him. 
   ‘OK?’ she  added to  the big  man,  who was  looking at her with slow
surprise.  His eyes were large and blue and conveyed the impression that
they  had  looked  at  a  lot  of  glaciers  in  their  time. They  were
extraordinarily arrogant and also muddled. 
   ‘OK?’ she  repeated briskly. ‘My name is Kate  Schechter.  Two  ‘c’s,
two ‘h’s, two ‘e’s and  also a ‘t’, an ‘r’  and an ‘s’. Provided they’re
all there the  bank  won’t be fussy about the order  they  come in. They
never seem to know themselves.’ 
   The man very  slowly  inclined  his head a  little  towards her in  a
rough bow  of acknowledgement. He thanked her for her kindness, courtesy
and some Norwegian word that  was lost on her, said  that it  was a long
while  since he had encountered anything  of the  kind, that she  was  a
woman of spirit and some  other Norwegian word, and that he was indebted
to her. He also  added, as an afterthought,  that he had no cheque-book.
   ‘Right!’  said Kate, determined not to be deflected from her  course.
She fished in  her handbag for a piece of  paper,  took  a pen from  the
check-in counter, scribbled on the paper and thrust it at him. 
   ‘That’s  my address,’  she  said, ‘send me  the money. Hock your  fur
coat  if you have  to.  Just send  it  me.  OK?  I’m  taking  a flyer on
trusting you.’ 
   The  big man took the scrap of  paper, read the  few words on it with
immense slowness, then  folded it with  elaborate care  and  put it into
the pocket of his coat. Again he bowed to her very slightly. 
   Kate suddenly  realised that the check-in girl  was silently  waiting
for her pen back to fill in the credit card  form. She pushed it back at
her in  annoyance, handed over her  own ticket and imposed on herself an
icy calm. 
   The airport Tannoy announced the departure of their flight. 
   ‘May I see your passports, please?’ said the girl unhurriedly. 
   Kate handed hers over, but the big man didn’t have one. 
   ‘You /what/?’ exclaimed Kate. The airline  girl simply stopped moving
at all and  stared quietly at a random  point on  her desk  waiting  for
someone else to make a move. It wasn’t her problem. 
   The man repeated angrily that he  didn’t have  a passport. He shouted
it and banged his  fist  on  the counter  so hard  that it  was slightly
dented by the force of the blow. 
   Kate picked  up  her ticket,  her  passport and her  credit card  and
hoisted her garment bag back up on to her shoulder. 
   ‘This is when I get off,’ she said,  and simply walked away. She felt
that  she had made every effort a human being could possibly be expected
to make to catch her plane, but that it was not  to be. She would send a
message to  Jean-Philippe saying  that she  could  not be there, and  it
would probably  sit  in a slot next to his message to her saying why  he
could not be there either. For once they would be equally absent. 
   For the time being she would  go and cool off. She set off  in search
of first a  newspaper and then some coffee, and by dint of following the
appropriate signs was unable to locate either. She was  then  unable  to
find a working phone from which  to send a  message, and decided to give
up on the airport altogether. Just get out, she  told  herself,  find  a
taxi, and go back home. 
   She  threaded  her  way back  across the  check-in concourse, and had
almost made  it  to the  exit when she  happened to glance back  at  the
check-in desk that had  defeated  her, and was  just  in time to  see it
shoot up through the roof engulfed in a ball of orange flame. 
   As she lay beneath a pile of rubble, in  pain,  darkness, and choking
dust, trying to  find  sensation in her limbs, she was at least relieved
to  be able to think that she hadn’t merely been imagining that this was
a bad day. So thinking, she passed out. 
   
   
[::: CHAPTER 2 ::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::]
   
   The usual people tried to claim responsibility. 
   First the IRA, then the PLO and the Gas  Board.  Even British Nuclear
Fuels rushed  out a statement to  the  effect  that  the  situation  was
completely  under control, that it  was a one in  a million chance, that
there  was  hardly any radioactive leakage at all, and that the  site of
the explosion would make a  nice location  for a day out  with  the kids
and  a  picnic, before  finally having to admit that it wasn’t  actually
anything to do with them at all. 
   No cause could be found for the explosion. 
   It seemed to have  happened  spontaneously and of its  own free will.
Explanations were advanced, but  most of these were simply phrases which
restated  the  problem in  different  words,  along  the same principles
which  had  given the  world ‘metal  fatigue’. In fact,  a  very similar
phrase was  invented to  account  for  the  sudden  transition of  wood,
metal, plastic  and concrete  into  an  explosive  condition, which  was
‘non-linear catastrophic structural exasperation’, or to put it  another
way  --  as a  junior cabinet minister did  on television  the following
night in  a  phrase which  was  to haunt  the rest of his career --  the
check-in desk had  just got ‘fundamentally  fed  up  with being where it
was’. 
   As in all such disastrous  events, estimates of the casualties varied
wildly.   They   started  at  forty-seven  dead,  eighty-nine  seriously
injured, went up to sixty-three dead, a  hundred and thirty injured, and
rose  as  high  as  one  hundred and  seventeen dead  before the figures
started to be revised downwards once more. The  final  figures  revealed
that  once all the people who could be  accounted for had been accounted
for, in fact no  one had been  killed at  all. A small number of  people
were in hospital suffering from cuts  and bruises and varying degrees of
traumatised shock,  but  that, unless anyone  had any  information about
anybody actually being missing, was that. 
   This was  yet another  inexplicable aspect to  the whole affair.  The
force of  the explosion  had been  enough to reduce a large  part of the
front of Terminal Two to rubble, and  yet  everyone inside the  building
had somehow either fallen very luckily,  or been shielded from one piece
of  falling  masonry  by  another,  or  had  the shock  of the explosion
absorbed  by their luggage. All in all, very little luggage had survived
at all.  There  were questions asked  in Parliament about  this, but not
very interesting ones. 
   It was a couple of days  before Kate Schechter became aware of any of
these things, or indeed of anything at all in the outside world. 
   She  passed the time quietly  in a world of  her own in which she was
surrounded  as far as the  eye could see with old cabin  trunks  full of
past memories in which  she rummaged with great curiosity, and sometimes
bewilderment. Or, at least, about a  tenth of the cabin trunks were full
of vivid, and often painful or  uncomfortable memories of her past life;
the  other  nine-tenths  were full  of  penguins,  which surprised  her.
Insofar  as she  recognised  at all that she was dreaming,  she realised
that she  must be exploring  her own subconscious mind. She had heard it
said that humans are  supposed  only  to  use  about a  tenth  of  their
brains, and  that no one was very clear  what the other nine-tenths were
for, but she had certainly never heard it suggested that  they were used
for storing penguins. 
   Gradually  the trunks,  the memories  and the penguins  began to grow
indistinct,  to become  all white and swimmy, then to become like  walls
that were  all white and swimmy,  and finally to become walls  that were
merely white, or rather a yellowish, greenish kind of off-white, and  to
enclose her in a small room. 
   The  room  was in semi-darkness. A  bedside light was  on but  turned
down low,  and  the light from a  street lamp found its  way between the
grey curtains  and  threw sodium  patterns  on  the  opposite wall.  She
became dimly aware of  the  shadowed shape of her  own body lying  under
the  white, turned-down sheet and the pale, neat blankets. She stared at
it for a nervous  while, checking that it looked right before she tried,
tentatively, to move  any part of it. She tried her right hand, and that
seemed to  be  fine.  A little  stiff  and aching, but  the  fingers all
responded, and all seemed to be  of  the right length and thickness, and
to bend in the right places and in the right directions. 
   She  panicked briefly when  she couldn’t immediately  locate her left
hand, but then she found it lying  across her stomach and nagging at her
in some  odd way. It took her  a  second or two  of concentration to put
together a  number  of rather disturbing feelings and realise that there
was a  needle bandaged into  her arm.  This shook her quite badly.  From
the needle  there snaked a  long  thin  transparent pipe that  glistened
yellowly in  the light from the  street lamp  and hung  in a gentle curl
from a thick plastic bag suspended from a tall metal  stand. An array of
horrors  briefly assailed  her in  respect  of  this apparatus, but  she
peered dimly  at the  bag and  saw  the words ‘Dextro-Saline’. She  made
herself  calm down  again and  lay  quietly  for  a  few moments  before
continuing her exploration. 
   Her ribcage seemed undamaged.  Bruised  and tender, but there was  no
sharper pain anywhere to suggest that  anything was broken. Her hips and
thighs  ached and were  stiff, but  revealed no serious hurt. She flexed
the  muscles down her  right leg and then her  left. She  rather fancied
that her left ankle was sprained. 
   In  other words, she told  herself, she  was perfectly all right.  So
what was she doing here in  what  she could  tell from the septic colour
of the paint was clearly a hospital? 
   She sat up  impatiently,  and immediately  rejoined the pen guins for
an entertaining few minutes. 
   The next  time  she came round she treated herself with a little more
care, and lay quietly, feeling gently nauseous. 
   She poked gingerly at  her memory  of what had happened.  It was dark
and blotchy and came at her  in sick, greasy waves like  the  North Sea.
Lumpy   things  jumbled   themselves  out  of  it  and  slowly  arranged
themselves into  a  heaving airport. The airport was  sour  and ached in
her head,  and in the  middle of  it, pulsing like  a migraine,  was the
memory of a moment’s whirling splurge of light. 
   It became suddenly very clear  to  her that the check-in concourse of
Terminal  Two  at  Heathrow   Airport  had  been  hit  by  a  meteorite.
Silhouetted in  the  flare  was the  fur-coated figure  of a big man who
must  have  caught the full force  of it and been reduced instantly to a
cloud of atoms that were free to go as  they pleased. The thought caused
a  deep and horrid  shudder to go through  her. He had been  infuriating
and  arrogant,  but  she  had liked him  in an  odd  way. There had been
something oddly  noble  in his perverse bloody-mindedness. Or maybe, she
realised,  she liked to think that such  perverse bloody-mindedness  was
noble  because it reminded her  of  herself trying to order pizza  to be
delivered  in   an  alien,   hostile  and   non-pizza-delivering  world.
Nobleness   was   one  word  for  making   a  fuss  about  the   trivial
inevitabilities of life, but there were others. 
   She  felt a sudden surge of fear and loneliness, but it quickly ebbed
away and left her  feeling much more composed, relaxed, and  wanting  to
go to the lavatory. 
   According  to her watch  it  was  shortly  after  three  o’clock, and
according  to  everything else it was  night-time. She  should  probably
call a nurse  and let  the world  know she  had come round. There was  a
window in  the side wall of the  room through which she could see a  dim
corridor in  which  stood  a stretcher  trolley and  a tall black oxygen
bottle,  but  which  was  otherwise  empty.  Things were very quiet  out
there. 
   Peering  around her in the small room she saw a white-painted plywood
cupboard, a couple of  tubular steel and vinyl chairs lurking quietly in
the  shadows,   and   a  white-painted  plywood  bedside  cabinet  which
supported  a small bowl with a single banana in it. On the other side of
the bed  stood her drip stand. Set into the wall on that side of the bed
was  a  metal plate  with a  couple  of  black knobs  and a  set of  old
bakelite headphones hanging from it,  and wound around  the tubular side
pillar of  the  bedhead was  a  cable  with a  bell push attached to it,
which she fingered, and then decided not to push. 
   She was fine. She could find her own way about. 
   Slowly,  a little  woozily, she pushed herself  up on  to her elbows,
and  slid  her legs out from under the sheets and on to the floor, which
was  cold  to  her  feet. She  could  tell  almost  immediately that she
shouldn’t be doing this  because every part of her feet was sending back
streams of messages  telling her exactly what  every tiniest bit  of the
floor that they touched  felt like, as if  it was a strange and worrying
thing the like of which  they had never encountered before. Nevertheless
she sat on the edge  of the  bed  and  made her feet accept the floor as
something they were just going to have to get used to. 
   The  hospital  had put  her  into  a large, baggy, striped thing.  It
wasn’t  merely baggy,  she  decided  on examining it  more  closely,  it
actually  was  a bag. A bag  of loose  blue and white striped cotton. It
opened  up  the back  and  let  in  chilly  night  draughts. Perfunctory
sleeves flopped  half-way down  her arms. She  moved her arms around  in
the  light, examining the skin, rubbing  it and  pinching it, especially
around the bandage  which  held her drip needle in  place. Normally  her
arms  were  lithe and  the skin was firm  and supple.  Tonight, however,
they looked like  bits of  chickens. Briefly she smoothed  each  forearm
with her other hand, and then looked up again, purposefully. 
   She  reached out and  gripped  the drip stand and, because it wobbled
slightly less  than  she did,  she was able to  use  it  to pull herself
slowly to  her  feet. She  stood there, her  tall slim figure trembling,
and  after a  few  seconds she held the drip  stand away at a bent arm’s
length, like a shepherd holding a crook. 
   She had not made it to Norway, but she was at least standing up. 
   The drip  stand  rolled  on four  small  and  independently  perverse
wheels which behaved  like four screaming children in a supermarket, but
nevertheless Kate  was able  to  propel  it to the door  ahead  of  her.
Walking  increased  her  sense  of  wooziness,  but also  increased  her
resolve not to  give in  to  it. She  reached  the  door, opened it, and
pushing the drip  stand out  ahead of her, looked out into the corridor.
   To  her  left the  corridor  ended in  a  couple  of swing-doors with
circular porthole  windows,  which seemed to lead into a larger area, an
open  ward perhaps. To  her  right a number of smaller  doors opened off
the corridor  as  it continued on for a  short distance before turning a
sharp corner. One of those  doors  would probably  be the lavatory.  The
others? Well, she would find out as she looked for the lavatory. 
   The first two were  cupboards. The third was slightly  bigger and had
a  chair  in it and  therefore  probably  counted  as a room since  most
people  don’t like to sit  in  cupboards, even nurses, who have  to do a
lot of  things that most people wouldn’t like to. It also had a stack of
styro beakers,  a lot of  semi-congealed coffee creamer  and  an elderly
coffee maker, all sitting on  top of a small table together  and seeping
grimly over a copy of the /Evening Standard/. 
   Kate picked up the dark,  damp paper and tried to reconstruct some of
her missing days from it. However,  what with  her own  wobbly condition
making it difficult to read, and  the  droopily stuck-together condition
of  the newspaper, she  was able to glean little more than the fact that
no one could  really say for certain  what  had happened. It seemed that
no  one had  been  seriously hurt, but that an  employee of one  of  the
airlines   was  still  unaccounted   for.  The  incident  had  now  been
officially classified as an ‘Act of God’. 
   ‘Nice one, God,’  thought Kate. She put down the remains of the paper
and closed the door behind her. 
   The next door  she tried was another small  side ward  like  her own.
There was a bedside table and a single banana in the fruit bowl. 
   The bed  was  clearly  occupied. She pulled the door to quickly,  but
she did  not  pull it  quickly enough. Unfortunately  something odd  had
caught her  attention,  but although  she had noticed  it, she could not
immediately say  what it was. She stood there with the door half closed,
staring at  the  door,  knowing  that  she should  not look  again,  and
knowing that she would. 
   Carefully she eased the door back open again. 
   The room was darkly shadowed and chilly. The  chilliness did not give
her a  good  feeling  about  the occupant of the bed.  She listened. The
silence  didn’t sound too good either. It  wasn’t the silence of healthy
deep sleep, it  was the silence of nothing but a little  distant traffic
noise. 
   She  hesitated for a long while, silhouetted in  the doorway, looking
and listening. She wondered  about the sheer bulk of the occupant of the
bed and how  cold he was with  just a thin blanket pulled over him. Next
to the  bed  was a small  tubular-legged  vinyl bucket  chair which  was
rather overwhelmed  by the huge and  heavy fur coat draped over it,  and
Kate thought  that the coat should more  properly be draped over the bed
and its cold occupant. 
   At  last, walking as  softly and cautiously  as she  could, she moved
into the room  and over to the bed. She  stood looking down at the  face
of the big, Nordic man. Though cold, and though his eyes were shut,  his
face  was frowning  slightly as  if  he was still  rather worried  about
something. This struck Kate as being almost  infinitely sad. In life the
man had had  the air  of  someone who  was  beset by  huge,  if somewhat
puzzling,   difficulties,   and  the  appearance  that  he  had   almost
immediately found  things  beyond this life that were a bother to him as
well was miserable to contemplate. 
   She was astonished that he appeared to be so unscathed. His  skin was
totally  unmarked.  It was rugged and  healthy --  or  rather  had  been
healthy until  very recently. Closer inspection showed a network of fine
lines  which  suggested that he  was older than the mid-thirties she had
originally assumed. He could even have  been a very fit and  healthy man
in his late forties. 
   Standing against the wall, by the door, was  something unexpected. It
was a large Coca-Cola vending machine. It didn’t look  as if it had been
installed  there: it wasn’t plugged in and it  had a small neat  sticker
on it explaining that  it  was temporarily out of order. It looked as if
it had simply been left there inadvertently by someone  who was probably
even  now walking around  wondering which  room he had left  it  in. Its
large red and white  wavy panel  stared  glassily into the room  and did
not  explain itself. The only  thing  the  machine  communicated  to the
outside world was that there was  a  slot into which coins of  a variety
of denominations  might be inserted, and an  aperture to which a variety
of different cans would be delivered if the machine was  working,  which
it was  not. There was  also  an  old  sledge-hammer  leaning against it
which was, in its own way, odd. 
   Faintness began  to creep over  Kate,  the room  began  to  develop a
slight spin, and there  was some  restless rustling in the  cabin trunks
of her mind. 
   Then she realised  that  the rustling wasn’t simply  her imagination.
There  was a distinct noise in the room -- a  heavy, beating, scratching
noise, a  muffled fluttering. The noise rose and fell like the wind, but
in  her dazed and woozy  state, Kate could  not at first tell  where the
noise  was  coming  from.  At last  her gaze  fell on the  curtains. She
stared at them with  the worried frown of a drunk trying to work out why
the  door is dancing. The sound was coming from the curtains. She walked
uncertainly  towards them  and  pulled  them  apart. A  huge  eagle with
circles tattooed on its  wings  was  clattering and beating  against the
window,  staring  in with great  yellow eyes and  pecking wildly at  the
glass. 
   Kate staggered  back, turned and tried to  heave  herself out of  the
room. At the  end of the corridor  the porthole doors swung open and two
figures came  through  them.  Hands rushed  towards  her  as  she became
hopelessly entangled in the drip stand and  began slowly to spin towards
the floor. 
   She was unconscious as they  carefully  laid her back in her bed. She
was unconscious half an hour  later when a disturbingly  short figure in
a worryingly long white doctor’s coat arrived,  wheeled the big man away
on a  stretcher  trolley and then returned after a  few minutes  for the
Coca-Cola machine. 
   She woke a  few hours later  with  a wintry sun  seeping through  the
window.  The  day looked very  quiet  and ordinary, but  Kate  was still
shaking. 
   
   
[::: CHAPTER 3 ::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::]
   
   The same sun later  broke in through the upper windows of a house  in
North London and struck the peacefully sleeping figure of a man. 
   The room in which he  slept was large and bedraggled and did not much
benefit from the sudden intrusion of light.  The sun crept slowly across
the bedclothes, as if nervous of  what it might find amongst them, slunk
down  the side  of the  bed, moved in a rather startled way across  some
objects  it encountered on the floor, toyed  nervously with a couple  of
motes of dust,  lit briefly on a stuffed fruitbat hanging in the corner,
and fled. 
   This was about as big an appearance as the sun ever put in here,  and
it  lasted  for about  an  hour or  so, during  which time  the sleeping
figure scarcely stirred. 
   At eleven  o’clock the  phone rang,  and still  the  figure  did  not
respond, any  more  than it had responded  when  the phone had  rung  at
twenty-five to seven in the morning, again at twenty to  seven, again at
ten to  seven,  and again  for ten minutes continuously starting at five
to  seven,  after  which  it  has settled into  a long  and  significant
silence, disturbed only  by  the  braying  of police sirens  in a nearby
street at  around  nine o’clock,  the  delivery of  a large  eighteenth-
century  dual  manual   harpsichord  at  around  nine-fifteen,  and  the
collection  of same by bailiffs  at a little after ten.  This  was a not
uncommon  sort of occurrence -- the people  concerned were accustomed to
finding  the  key  under  the  doormat,  and  the  man  in  the  bed was
accustomed to sleeping through it.  You  would probably not say  that he
was sleeping the sleep of the just,  unless  you meant the just  asleep,
but it was  certainly the sleep  of  someone  who was not  fooling about
when he climbed into bed of a night and turned off the light. 
   The room  was  not a room to elevate the soul.  Louis XIV,  to pick a
name  at random, would not have liked it, would have  found it not sunny
enough,  and  insufficiently  full  of  mirrors.  He  would have desired
someone to pick up the socks, put  the records away, and  maybe burn the
place down. Michelangelo would have been  distressed by its proportions,
which were neither lofty nor shaped by any noticeable  inner harmony  or
symmetry, other  than that  all  parts  of  the  room  were  pretty much
equally  full of  old coffee mugs, shoes and brimming ashtrays,  most of
which  were now  sharing  their  tasks with each other.  The walls  were
painted  in almost precisely that shade of green which Raffaello  Sanzio
would  have bitten  off his own right hand at the wrist rather than use,
and  Hercules, on  seeing the room, would probably have returned half an
hour  later armed with  a navigable river. It was, in short, a dump, and
was likely  to remain so for as long as it remained in the custody of Mr
Svlad, or ‘Dirk’, Gently, né Cjelli. 
   At last Gently stirred. 
   The sheets and blankets were pulled up tightly  around his  head, but
from  somewhere  half way  down  the  length of the  bed a  hand  slowly
emerged  from  under  the  bedclothes and  its fingers felt their way in
little  tapping movements along the floor. Working from experience, they
neatly  circumvented  a  bowl  of something  very nasty  that  had  been
sitting  there since  Michaelmas, and eventually  happened  upon a half-
empty  pack of untipped Gauloises  and a box  of  matches.  The  fingers
shook  a crumpled white tube free of the pack, seized it and  the box of
matches, and  then  started to  poke  a way  through the  sheets tangled
together  at the  top  of  the  bed,  like  a  magician  prodding  at  a
handkerchief from which he intends to release a flock of doves. 
   The  cigarette was at last inserted into  the hole. The cigarette was
lit. For a while the bed itself appeared  to be smoking the cigarette in
great heaving drags. It  coughed long,  loud  and  shudderingly and then
began at last to  breathe  in a more  measured rhythm. In this way, Dirk
Gently achieved consciousness. 
   He lay there for a while feeling a terrible sense  of worry and guilt
about something weighing on  his  shoulders.  He wished he  could forget
about  it, and  promptly did. He  levered himself out  of bed  and a few
minutes later padded downstairs. 
   The mail on the doormat consisted of the usual things: a rude  letter
threatening to take away his  American  Express card, an  invitation  to
apply  for  an  American  Express  card,  and a few  bills  of the  more
hysterical  and unrealistic  type. He  couldn’t understand why they kept
sending  them. The  cost of  the postage seemed merely to be good  money
thrown after  bad. He  shook his  head in  wonderment at the  malevolent
incompetence of the world, threw  the mail away, entered the kitchen and
approached the fridge with caution. 
   It stood in the corner. 
   The  kitchen  was large  and  shrouded  in  a deep gloom that was not
relieved, only turned yellow, by  the action of  switching on the light.
Dirk squatted down  in  front  of the fridge  and carefully examined the
edge of the door. He  found what  he was looking  for. In  fact he found
more than he was looking for. 
   Near the bottom of the door, across  the narrow  gap  which separated
the door from the main body of the fridge, which held the strip of  grey
insulating rubber, lay a single human  hair.  It was  stuck  there  with
dried saliva. That  he had expected. He had stuck it there himself three
days  earlier and had  checked it on several  occasions since then. What
he had not expected to find was a second hair. 
   He frowned at it in alarm. A /second/ hair? 
   It was  stuck  across the gap  in the same way as the first one, only
this hair was  near  the top of the fridge door, and he had  not put  it
there. He peered at it  closely, and even  went so far as to go and open
the old shutters  on the kitchen windows to let some extra light in upon
the scene. 
   The daylight  shouldered  its way in like a squad of  policemen,  and
did a  lot  of /what’s-all-this/ing around  the  room  which,  like  the
bedroom,  would  have presented anyone  of an aesthetic disposition with
difficulties.  Like  most  of the  rooms in  Dirk’s house  it was large,
looming and  utterly dishevelled. It simply sneered at anyone’s attempts
to  tidy  it, sneered at  them  and brushed them  aside like one of  the
small  pile of dead  and disheartened flies that lay beneath the window,
on top of a pile of old pizza boxes. 
   The light revealed the second hair for what it was -- a grey  hair at
root, dyed a vivid  metallic orange.  Dirk pursed  his  lips and thought
very  deeply. He didn’t need to  think  hard in order to realise who the
hair belonged to -- there  was only one person who regularly entered the
kitchen looking  as if  her  head  had  been  used  for extracting metal
oxides from  industrial waste -- but he  did have seriously to  consider
the implications  of the discovery that she had been plastering her hair
across the door of his fridge. 
   It meant that the  silently waged conflict  between  himself and  his
cleaning  lady had escalated to a new and more frightening level. It was
now, Dirk reckoned, fully three  months since this fridge door  had been
opened,  and  each  of them was grimly  determined  not to be the one to
open it first. The fridge  no longer merely stood there in the corner of
the  kitchen,  it actually lurked. Dirk could quite clearly remember the
day  on which  the thing had started lurking.  It was  about a week ago,
when  Dirk had tried a simple subterfuge to trick Elena -- the old bat’s
name was  Elena, pronounced  to rhyme with cleaner,  which was  an irony
that Dirk now no  longer relished -- into opening  the  fridge door. The
subterfuge  had been deftly  deflected and had nearly rebounded horribly
on Dirk. 
   He had resorted to the strategy of  going to the local mini-market to
buy  a  few simple groceries. Nothing contentious -- a little milk, some
eggs,  some  bacon, a  carton or two  of chocolate custard and  a simple
half-pound  of  butter.  He had  left them,  innocently, on  top  of the
fridge as if to say, ‘Oh, when you have a moment,  perhaps you could pop
these inside...’ 
   When he had returned that evening his heart  bounded to see that they
were no longer on top of the fridge.  They were gone! They had  not been
merely moved aside or put on a shelf, they were nowhere  to be seen. She
must finally have capitulated  and put them away. In the fridge. And she
would surely  have  cleaned it  out once  it  was actually open. For the
first and only time his heart  swelled with warmth and gratitude towards
her, and  he was about to fling open the door of the thing in relief and
triumph when an eighth sense (at  the  last count, Dirk reckoned  he had
eleven) warned him  to  be  very,  very careful,  and to consider  first
where Elena might have put the cleared out contents of the fridge. 
   A nameless doubt gnawed at  his mind as he moved noiselessly  towards
the garbage bin  beneath the sink. Holding his breath, he opened the lid
and looked. 
   There, nestling in the  folds of  the fresh black bin liner, were his
eggs,  his bacon,  his chocolate  custard  and his simple  half-pound of
butter.  Two milk bottles stood  rinsed and neatly lined up by  the sink
into which their contents had presumably been poured. 
   She had thrown it away. 
   Rather than  open the fridge door, she  had thrown  his food away. He
looked round  slowly at the  grimy,  squat, white monolith, and that was
the  exact moment at which he realised  without a shadow of a doubt that
his fridge had now begun seriously to lurk. 
   He made himself a stiff  black coffee and sat, slightly trembling. He
had  not  even looked  directly at the sink,  but he knew that  he  must
unconsciously  have noticed the two clean  milk bottles  there, and some
busy part of his mind had been alarmed by them. 
   The next day  he  had  explained all this  away  to himself.  He  was
becoming  needlessly  paranoiac.  It  had  surely been  an  innocent  or
careless  mistake  on  Elena’s  part.  She had  probably  been  brooding
distractedly  on  her   son’s  attack   of  bronchitis,  peevishness  or
homosexuality  or  whatever it  was that  regularly  prevented  her from
either turning up, or from  having  noticeable effect  when she did. She
was  Italian  and  probably  had  absent-mindedly mistaken  his food for
garbage. 
   But  the  business with the  hair changed all  that.  It  established
beyond all possible doubt  that she knew exactly what she was doing. She
was under  no circumstances  going to open the fridge  door until he had
opened  it first, and he was  under no circumstances  going to  open the
fridge until she had. 
   Obviously  she had not noticed his hair, otherwise it would have been
her most effective course  simply to pull it off, thus tricking him into
thinking she had opened the  fridge. He should presumably now remove her
hair  in the hope of pulling that same trick on her,  but even as he sat
there  he  knew  that  somehow  that wouldn’t work, and  that they  were
locked  into a tightening spiral of non-fridge-opening  that  would lead
them both to madness or perdition. 
   He wondered if he could hire someone to come and open the fridge. 
   No. He was not  in a position to hire  anybody to do anything. He was
not even in a  position to  pay Elena for the last three weeks. The only
reason  he didn’t  ask her to leave was that sacking somebody inevitably
involved  paying them  off, and  this he was in  no position to do.  His
secretary had finally left him on her own initiative and gone off to  do
something reprehensible in the travel  business. Dirk  had attempted  to
cast scorn on her preferring monotony of pay over -- 
   ‘/Regularity/ of pay,’ she had calmly corrected him. 
   -- over job satisfaction. 
   She  had nearly said, ‘Over /what/?’, but at that moment she realised
that  if  she  said  that she would have  to listen to  his reply, which
would be bound to infuriate  her into  arguing back. It occurred to  her
for the first time  that the  only way of  escaping  was just not to get
drawn into these  arguments. If  she simply  did not  respond this time,
then she was free  to  leave. She tried it. She  felt a  sudden freedom.
She left. A week  later,  in much the same mood, she  married an airline
cabin steward called Smith. 
   Dirk had kicked her desk over,  and  then  had to pick it up  himself
later when she didn’t come back. 
   The detective  business was  currently  as brisk as the tomb. Nobody,
it seemed, wished to have  anything  detected. He  had recently, to make
ends meet, taken up doing palmistry in drag  on  Thursday evenings,  but
he wasn’t  comfortable  with  it.  He  could have  withstood  it --  the
hateful,  abject humiliation of it all was something to which he had, in
different  ways, now become accustomed, and  he  was  quite anonymous in
his  little tent  in  the  back garden  of  the  pub  --  he  could have
withstood it all if he  hadn’t been so horribly,  excruciatingly good at
it. It made  him break out  in  a  sweat of  self-loathing. He tried  by
every means  to cheat, to  fake,  to be  deliberately and cynically bad,
but  whatever  fakery  he  tried  to  introduce  always  failed  and  he
invariably ended up being right. 
   His worst moment  had come about  as a  result of the poor woman from
Oxfordshire who had come in to see  him one evening. Being  in something
of a waggish mood,  he had suggested that she should keep an  eye on her
husband, who,  judging  by  her marriage line, looked to be a  bit  of a
flighty  type. It  transpired that  her husband was  in fact  a  fighter
pilot, and that  his  plane had been lost in an exercise over  the North
Sea only a fortnight earlier. 
   Dirk had  been  flustered  by  this and  had soothed meaninglessly at
her. He was certain, he said, that her husband would be  restored to her
in the fullness of time, that all would be well, and that all  manner of
things would  be  well and so on. The woman said  that she  thought this
was not  very likely seeing as the world record for staying alive in the
North  Sea was rather  less than  an hour,  and since  no  trace  of her
husband had  been found in two weeks it seemed fanciful to imagine  that
he was  anything other  than stone dead, and she was trying to  get used
to the idea, thank you very much. She said it rather tartly. 
   Dirk had lost all control at this point and started to babble. 
   He said that  it was very clear from reading her hands that the great
sum of money she had  coming  to her would be no consolation to  her for
the loss of her dear, dear husband,  but  that at least it might comfort
her to know that he had gone on to that great something or other  in the
sky, that he  was floating on the  fleeciest  of white  clouds,  looking
very handsome in  his new set of wings, and that  he  was terribly sorry
to be talking  such  appalling drivel but she had caught  him  rather by
surprise. Would she care for some tea, or some vodka, or some soup? 
   The woman demurred. She said she  had  only wandered into the tent by
accident,  she  had been looking for the lavatories,  and what  was that
about the money? 
   ‘Complete   gibberish,’  Dirk  had   explained.   He   was  in  great
difficulties,  what  with having  the falsetto to keep up. ‘I was making
it up as  I went  along,’ he said. ‘Please allow  me to tender  my  most
profound  apologies for intruding so clumsily on your private grief, and
to escort  you to, er, or rather,  direct you to  the, well,  what I can
only in the circumstances call  the lavatory, which  is out  of the tent
and on the left.’ 
   Dirk  had been cast  down  by  this encounter,  but was  then utterly
horrified  a few days later  when he discovered that the very  following
morning  the  unfortunate  woman had learnt that she had won £250,000 on
the  Premium Bonds. He spent  several hours that night  standing  on the
roof of his house, shaking his  fist at the dark sky and shouting, ‘Stop
it!’ until a  neighbour complained to the police that he couldn’t sleep.
The police had  come  round in a  screaming squad  car  and woken up the
rest of the neighbourhood as well. 
   Today,  this morning, Dirk sat  in  his kitchen and stared dejectedly
at his fridge. The bloody-minded ebullience which he usually  relied  on
to  carry him through the  day  had been knocked  out of him in its very
opening  moments  by  the  business  with  the   fridge.  His  will  sat
imprisoned in it, locked up by a single hair. 
   What  he needed, he thought,  was a client. Please, God, he  thought,
if there is  a god, any  god,  bring me  a client. Just a simple client,
the  simpler  the  better. Credulous and rich. Someone  like  that  chap
yesterday. He tapped his fingers on the table. 
   The problem  was that  the  more  credulous the client, the more Dirk
fell  foul at the  end of  his  own better nature, which  was constantly
rearing up and embarrassing him  at the  most  inopportune moments. Dirk
frequently threatened to hurl his better nature to  the ground and kneel
on  its  windpipe, but  it usually managed  to get the better of  him by
dressing itself up as  guilt and self-loathing, in which guise  it could
throw him right out of the ring. 
   Credulous  and rich. Just so that he could pay off some, perhaps even
just  one, of  the more  prominent  and  sensational  bills.  He  lit  a
cigarette. The  smoke curled  upwards in the morning light and  attached
itself to the ceiling. 
   Like that chap yesterday... 
   He paused. 
   The chap yesterday... 
   The world held its breath. 
   Quietly  and  gently  there  settled  on  him   the   knowledge  that
something, somewhere, was ghastly. Something was terribly wrong. 
   There was a disaster  hanging silently  in the air around him waiting
for him to notice it. His knees tingled. 
   What he needed, he  had  been  thinking, was  a  client. He  had been
thinking that as  a  matter of  habit.  It was what he always thought at
this time of the morning. What he had forgotten was that he had one. 
   He  stared  wildly  at  his watch. Nearly eleven-thirty. He shook his
head  to try and clear the silent  ringing between his ears, then made a
hysterical lunge  for  his  hat and his  great  leather  coat that  hung
behind the door.
   Fifteen  seconds later  he left the house, five hours late but moving
fast. 
   
   
[::: CHAPTER 4 ::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::]
   
   A  minute  or two  later Dirk paused  to consider his  best strategy.
Rather than arrive five hours  late and flustered it would be better all
round if he were to arrive five  hours and a few extra minutes late, but
triumphantly in command. 
   ‘Pray God I am  not  too soon!’ would  be a good  opening  line as he
swept  in, but  it needed a  good follow-through  as well, and he wasn’t
sure what it should be. 
   Perhaps  it  would save time if he went back to get his car, but then
again it was only a short distance, and he had  a tremendous  propensity
for getting lost  when driving.  This was largely because  of his method
of ‘Zen’ navigation, which was simply to find any car that looked  as if
it  knew where it was  going and follow  it. The results were more often
surprising than successful, but he felt it was worth it  for the sake of
the few occasions when it was both. 
   Furthermore he was not at all certain that his car was working. 
   It  was an elderly  Jaguar, built  at  that  very special time in the
company’s  history  when they were making  cars  which  had  to stop for
repairs more often than they  needed to stop  for petrol, and frequently
needed  to rest for  months  between  outings. He was, however, certain,
now that he came to think about it, that  the car didn’t have any petrol
and furthermore he did not  have any cash or valid plastic to enable him
to fill it up. 
   He abandoned that line of thought as wholly fruitless. 
   He  stopped to  buy  a newspaper  while  he  thought things over. The
clock in the newsagent’s said  eleven thirty-five.  Damn, damn, damn. He
toyed with the  idea of simply dropping the case.  Just walking away and
forgetting about  it.  Having  some lunch. The whole  thing  was fraught
with  difficulties in  any  event. Or  rather it was  fraught  with  one
particular  difficulty which was that of keeping a  straight  face.  The
whole  thing  was complete and utter  nonsense.  The  client was clearly
loopy and Dirk would not have considered taking the  case except for one
very important thing. 
   Three hundred pounds a day plus expenses. 
   The  client  had agreed to it  just  like  that.  And  when Dirk  had
started  his usual speech  to the effect that his  methods, involving as
they did the fundamental interconnectedness of all  things, often led to
expenses  that  might  appear  to  the  untutored  eye  to  be  somewhat
tangential to  the matter  in  hand,  the  client  had  simply waved the
matter aside as trifling. Dirk liked that in a client. 
   The only thing the client had insisted  upon  in  the midst  of  this
almost superhuman fit of reasonableness  was that  Dirk had to be there,
absolutely  had,  had,  had to  be there ready,  functioning and  alert,
without fail, without  even the merest smidgen of an inkling of failure,
at six-thirty in the morning. Absolute. 
   Well, he was just going to have  to see  reason about that  as  well.
Six-thirty  was  clearly  a  preposterous  time  and   he,  the  client,
obviously  hadn’t meant it seriously.  A civilised six-thirty for twelve
noon was almost certainly  what he had in mind, and  if he wanted to cut
up  rough about it, Dirk would have no option  but to  start handing out
some  serious statistics. Nobody  got murdered before lunch. But nobody.
People weren’t up  to it. You needed a good lunch to get both the blood-
sugar and blood-lust levels up. Dirk had the figures to prove it. 
   Did he, Anstey (the  client’s name was Anstey, an odd, intense man in
his mid-thirties with staring eyes, a  narrow yellow tie and  one of the
big houses in Lupton  Road; Dirk hadn’t actually liked him very much and
thought he looked as  if he was trying to  swallow a fish),  did he know
that 67  per  cent  of all known  murderers, who expressed a preference,
had had liver and  bacon for  lunch? And that  another 22  per cent  had
been torn between either a prawn biryani or an omelette? That  dispensed
with 89 per  cent of the  threat at a stroke, and by  the  time you  had
further  discounted  the salad  eaters  and  the turkey and ham sandwich
munchers  and  started  to  look at  the  number  of  people  who  would
contemplate such a course of action  without any lunch at all, then  you
were well into the realms of negligibility and bordering on fantasy. 
   After two-thirty, but  nearer  to three o’clock, was when you had  to
start  being on your  guard. Seriously. Even on good days. Even when you
weren’t  receiving death threats  from  strange gigantic men  with green
eyes, you had to watch people  like a hawk  after the lunching hour. The
really dangerous time was after  four o’clockish, when the streets began
to fill up with marauding packs  of publishers and agents, maddened with
fettucine and kir and baying for cabs. Those  were the times that tested
men’s souls. Six-thirty in the morning? Forget it. Dirk had. 
   With  his  resolve  well  stiffened  Dirk  stepped  back  out  of the
newsagent’s into the nippy air of the street and strode off. 
   ‘Ah,  I  expect you’ll be wanting  to pay for that paper, then, won’t
you, Mr Dirk, sir?’ said the newsagent, trotting gently after him. 
   ‘Ah, Bates,’  said  Dirk  loftily, ‘you and your expectations. Always
expecting  this and expecting that.  May I recommend serenity  to you? A
life that is burdened with expectations  is a heavy life.  Its  fruit is
sorrow and disappointment. Learn  to be one with the joy of the moment.’
   ‘I think it’s twenty pence that one, sir,’ said Bates, tranquilly. 
   ‘Tell you what I’ll  do, Bates, seeing as it’s you. Do you have a pen
on you at all? A simple ball-point will suffice.’ 
   Bates  produced  one from an inner pocket and handed it to  Dirk, who
then tore off the  corner  of the  paper on  which the price was printed
and  scribbled  ‘IOU’  above it. He handed  the  scrap  of  paper to the
newsagent. 
   ‘Shall I put this with the others, then, sir?’ 
   ‘Put  it wherever it will give you  the greatest  joy, dear Bates,  I
would want you to put it nowhere less. For now, dear man, farewell.’ 
   ‘I  expect  you’ll be wanting to  give  me back my pen  as  well,  Mr
Dirk.’ 
   ‘When  the  times  are propitious for  such  a  transaction, my  dear
Bates,’ said Dirk,  ‘you  may  depend  upon it. For  the moment,  higher
purposes call it. Joy, Bates, great joy. Bates, please let go of it.’ 
   After one last listless tug, the little man  shrugged and padded back
towards his shop. 
   ‘I  expect  I’ll be seeing  you later, then,  Mr Dirk,’ he called out
over his shoulder, without enthusiasm. 
   Dirk gave a  gracious  bow of his head to  the man’s retreating back,
and then hurried  on, opening the  newspaper at the horoscope page as he
did so. 
   ‘Virtually everything  you  decide  today  will  be  wrong,’ it  said
bluntly. 
   Dirk  slapped the paper shut with a grunt.  He  did not for  a second
hold with the notion that great whirling lumps of rock light  years away
knew something about your day that you  didn’t. It just so happened that
‘The  Great  Zaganza’ was an old friend  of  his who  knew  when  Dirk’s
birthday was, and always wrote his column deliberately  to wind  him up.
The  paper’s  circulation had dropped by nearly a  twelfth since he  had
taken over doing the  horoscope,  and only Dirk and  The  Great  Zaganza
knew why. 
   He  hurried  on, flapping  his way quickly  through  the  rest of the
paper. As  usual,  there  was nothing interesting.  A lot of stuff about
the  search  for  Janice  Smith, the missing airline girl from Heathrow,
and how  she  could  possibly  have  disappeared  just  like  that. They
printed  the latest  picture of her, which was on a swing with pigtails,
aged six. Her  father, a  Mr Jim  Pearce,  was quoted as  saying it  was
quite a good likeness, but she had  grown up  a lot  now and was usually
in better focus. Impatiently, Dirk  tucked  the paper under  his arm and
strode onwards, his thoughts on a much more interesting topic. 
   Three hundred pounds a day. Plus expenses. 
   He  wondered  how  long he could reasonably  expect to  sustain in Mr
Anstey his strange  delusions  that he  was  about  to be murdered  by a
seven foot tall, shaggy-haired creature with  huge green eyes and horns,
who  habitually  waved  things  at  him:  a  contract  written  in  some
incomprehensible language and signed with a splash  of blood, and also a
kind of scythe.  The other notable feature of  this creature was that no
one  other than his  client  had  been able  to see  it, which Mr Anstey
dismissed as a trick of the light. 
   Three  days? Four? Dirk  didn’t think he’d be  able to manage a whole
week with a straight face, but he was already  looking at something like
a grand for his trouble. And  he would  stick  a new fridge down  on the
list of tangential  but non-negotiable  expenses.  That would be  a good
one.  Getting the  old  fridge  thrown  out was  definitely part of  the
interconnectedness of all things. 
   He began to whistle at the thought  of simply getting someone to come
round  and  cart  the  thing  away,  turned  into  Lupton  Road  and was
surprised at  all the  police cars there. And  the ambulance.  He didn’t
like  them being  there. It didn’t feel right. It didn’t sit comfortably
in his mind alongside his visions of a new fridge. 
   
   
[::: CHAPTER 5 ::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::]
   
   Dirk  knew Lupton  Road. It was a wide tree-lined affair, with  large
late-Victorian  terraces  which  stood tall  and  sturdily  and resented
police cars.  Resented them if they turned  up in numbers, that  is, and
if their lights were flashing.  The inhabitants  of Lupton Road liked to
see  a  nice, well-turned-out  single police car patrolling up and  down
the street in  a cheerful and robust manner --  it  kept property values
cheerful  and  robust too. But the moment the lights started flashing in
that  knuckle-whitening blue, they  cast their  pallor not only  on  the
neatly pointed bricks that  they flashed across,  but  also  on the very
values those bricks represented. 
   Anxious faces peered  from behind the glass  of neighbouring windows,
and were irradiated by the blue strobes. 
   There were three  of them,  three police  cars  left askew across the
road in a  way  that  transcended mere  parking.  It sent  out a massive
signal to  the world saying that the law  was here  now taking charge of
things, and that anyone who just had normal, good and  cheerful business
to conduct in Lupton Road could just fuck off. 
   Dirk hurried  up  the road,  sweat  pricking at him beneath his heavy
leather coat.  A police constable loomed  up ahead  of him with his arms
spread out,  playing at being  a stop barrier, but Dirk swept  him aside
in a torrent of words to which  the constable was unable to come up with
a good response off the top of his head. Dirk sped on to the house. 
   At the  door another policeman  stopped  him, and Dirk  was about  to
wave an expired Marks and Spencer  charge card at him with a deft little
flick of the wrist that he had practised for hours in  front of a mirror
on those  long evenings when nothing  much else was on, when the officer
suddenly said, ‘Hey, is your name Gently?’ 
   Dirk blinked at him  warily. He  made  a  slight  grunting noise that
could be either ‘yes’ or ‘no’ depending on the circumstances. 
   ‘Because the Chief has been looking for you.’ 
   ‘Has he?’ said Dirk. 
   ‘I recognised you  from his description,’  said  the officer  looking
him up and down with a slight smirk. 
   ‘In fact,’  continued  the officer,  ‘he’s been using your  name in a
manner that some might find highly  offensive.  He even sent Big Bob the
Finder off  in a car to find you. I can  tell  that  he didn’t  find you
from the fact that  you’re looking reasonably well.  Lot of  people  get
found by  Big Bob the Finder, they come in a bit wobbly. Just about able
to help us with our enquiries but that’s  about all. You’d better go in.
Rather you than me,’ he added quietly. 
   Dirk glanced  at the  house.  The  stripped-pine shutters were closed
across all the windows.  Though in  all  other respects the house seemed
well  cared for, groomed into a state of clean, well-pointed  affluence,
the closed shutters seemed to convey an air of sudden devastation. 
   Oddly, there seemed to be music  coming from the basement, or rather,
just a single disjointed phrase  of thumping  music  being repeated over
and over  again. It sounded as if the stylus had got stuck in the groove
of  a record, and Dirk wondered why no  one  had  turned it off,  or  at
least  nudged  the stylus along so  that the record  could continue. The
song seemed very vaguely familiar and Dirk  guessed that he had probably
heard it on  the  radio  recently,  though  he  couldn’t  place it.  The
fragment of lyric seemed to be something like: 
   ‘/Don’t pick it up, pick it up, pick i --/ 
   ‘/Don’t pick it up, pick it up, pick i --/
   ‘/Don’t pick it up, pick it up, pick i --/’ and so on. 
   ‘You’ll be wanting  to go  down  to the  basement,’ said the  officer
impassively, as if that was  the last  thing  that anyone in their right
mind would be wanting to do. 
   Dirk nodded  to  him  curtly  and hurried  up the steps to the  front
door, which was standing slightly ajar.  He  shook his head and clenched
his shoulders to try and stop his brain fluttering. 
   He went in. 
   The  hallway  spoke  of  prosperity  imposed  on  a  taste  that  had
originally been  formed by student  living.  The  floors  were  stripped
boards heavily polyurethaned,  the  walls white with Greek  rugs hung on
them, but expensive  Greek  rugs. Dirk would  be prepared to bet (though
probably not to  pay  up)  that  a thorough  search of  the  house would
reveal, amongst  who knew what other  dark secrets, five hundred British
Telecom  shares and a set of Dylan albums that was complete up to /Blood
on the Tracks/. 
   Another  policeman  was  standing  in the  hall. He  looked  terribly
young, and  he was leaning very slightly  back against the wall, staring
at the floor and holding his helmet against  his stomach.  His face  was
pale and shiny.  He looked at  Dirk blankly,  and nodded  faintly in the
direction of the stairs leading down. 
   Up the stairs came the repeated sound: 
   ‘/Don’t pick it up, pick it up, pick i --/ 
   ‘/Don’t pick it up, pick it up, pick i --/’ 
   Dirk  was trembling with a rage  that was  barging  around inside him
looking for something to hit or throttle. He wished that he could  hotly
deny that any  of this was his fault, but  until anybody tried to assert
that it was, he couldn’t. 
   ‘How long have you been here?’ he said curtly. 
   The young policeman had to gather himself together to answer. 
   ‘We arrived about half-hour ago,’  he replied in a thick voice. ‘Hell
of a morning. Rushing around.’ 
   ‘Don’t  tell  me  about  rushing   around,’  said  Dirk,   completely
meaninglessly. He launched himself down the stairs. 
   ‘/Don’t pick it up, pick it up, pick i --/ 
   ‘/Don’t pick it up, pick it up, pick i --/’ 
   At the bottom there  was a narrow corridor. The  main door off it was
heavily  cracked  and hanging  off its  hinges.  It opened into  a large
double room. Dirk  was about to  enter when a figure emerged from it and
stood barring his way. 
   ‘I  hate  the fact  that this case has got you mixed up  in it,’ said
the  figure, ‘I hate it very much. Tell me what you’ve got to do with it
so I know exactly what it is I’m hating.’ 
   Dirk stared at the neat, thin face in astonishment. 
   ‘Gilks?’ he said. 
   ‘Don’t stand  there  looking like  a  startled  whatsisname, what are
those  things what  aren’t seals? Much  worse than  seals. Big  blubbery
things.  Dugongs. Don’t stand  there looking like a startled dugong. Why
has  that...’  Gilks  pointed   into  the  room  behind  him,  ‘why  has
that...man in there got your  name  and telephone number on  an envelope
full of money?’ 
   ‘How m...’ started Dirk. ‘How,  may  I ask, do  you come to be  here,
Gilks? What are you doing  so far  from the Fens?  Surprised you find it
dank enough for you here.’ 
   ‘Three hundred pounds,’ said Gilks. ‘Why?’ 
   ‘Perhaps you would allow me to speak to my client,’ said Dirk. 
   ‘Your client, eh?’ said Gilks grimly. ‘Yes. All right. Why don’t  you
speak to him? I’d be interested to  hear what you have to say.’ He stood
back stiffly, and waved Dirk into the room. 
   Dirk  gathered  his  thoughts  and entered the  room  in  a state  of
controlled composure which lasted for just over a second. 
   Most  of his client  was  sitting quietly in a  comfortable  chair in
front  of  the hi-fi. The chair  was  placed in  the  optimal  listening
position -- about twice as far back  from the  speakers as  the distance
between them,  which  is  generally  considered to  be ideal for  stereo
imaging. 
   He  seemed generally to be  casual  and relaxed with his legs crossed
and  a  half-finished cup  of coffee  on the  small  table  beside  him.
Distressingly, though, his  head was sitting neatly on the middle of the
record which  was  revolving on the hi-fi turntable,  with the  tone arm
snuggling  up against  the neck and constantly being deflected back into
the  same groove. As the head revolved  it seemed once every 1.8 seconds
or  so  to  shoot Dirk  a  reproachful  glance, as if to say, ‘See  what
happens when you don’t  turn  up on time like I  asked you to,’  then it
would sweep on  round to  the wall, round, round, and  back to the front
again with more reproach. 
   ‘/Don’t pick it up, pick it up, pick i --/
   ‘/Don’t pick it up, pick it up, pick i --/’ 
   The  room  swayed  a  little  around Dirk, and he put  his  hand  out
against the wall to steady it. 
   ‘Was there  any particular  service  you were engaged  to provide for
your client?’ said Gilks behind him, very quietly. 
   ‘Oh, er, just a small  matter,’ said Dirk weakly. ‘Nothing  connected
with all this.  No, he, er,  didn’t mention any of this kind of thing at
all. Well, look, I  can see you’re busy, I think I’d better just collect
my fee and leave. You say he left it out for me?’ 
   Having  said  this,  Dirk  sat  heavily  on  a  small bentwood  chair
standing behind him, and broke it. 
   Gilks hauled him back  to his feet again, and propped him against the
wall.  Briefly he  left the room,  then  came back with a small  jug  of
water and a  glass on a tray. He poured some water into  the glass, took
it to Dirk and threw it at him. 
   ‘Better?’ 
   ‘No,’ spluttered Dirk, ‘can’t you at least turn the record off?’ 
   ‘That’s  forensic’s job. Can’t  touch anything  till the clever dicks
have  been. Maybe that’s  them now. Go out on to  the patio and get some
air. Chain yourself to  the  railing and beat yourself up a  little, I’m
pushed for time  myself. And try to look less green, will you?  It’s not
your colour.’ 
   ‘/Don’t pick it up, pick it up, pick i --/ 
   ‘/Don’t pick it up, pick it up, pick i --/’ 
   Gilks turned round, looking  tired and cross, and was about to go out
and  up the stairs to meet the  newcomers whose voices could be heard up
on the  ground  floor,  when he  paused  and watched the head  revolving
patiently on its heavy platter for a few seconds. 
   ‘You know,’ he  said at  last,  ‘these  smart-alec show-off  suicides
really make me tired. They only do it to annoy.’ 
   ‘/Suicide?/’ said Dirk. 
   Gilks glanced round at him. 
   ‘Windows secured with iron bars half an  inch thick,’  he said. ‘Door
locked from the inside  with the key  still in the lock. Furniture piled
against the inside of the  door. French windows to the patio locked with
mortice  door  bolts.  No signs of a tunnel.  If it was murder then  the
murderer  must have stopped to do a damn  fine job of glazing on the way
out. Except that all the putty’s old and painted over. 
   ‘No. Nobody’s left this room,  and nobody’s broken into it except for
us, and I’m pretty sure we didn’t do it. 
   ‘I haven’t time to fiddle  around on this one. Obviously suicide, and
just done to be  difficult. I’ve  half  a mind  to  do the  deceased for
wasting police time.  Tell  you what,’  he  said, glancing at his watch,
‘you’ve got ten minutes.  If you come up with a plausible explanation of
how  he  did  it  that I can  put in my  report, I’ll  let you  keep the
evidence  in the envelope  minus 20 per cent compensation  to me for the
emotional wear and tear involved in not punching you in the mouth.’ 
   Dirk wondered  for  a moment whether or not to mention the visits his
client claimed to have received  from a strange and  violent green-eyed,
fur-clad  giant  who regularly  emerged  out of  nowhere bellowing about
contracts  and  obligations  and waving  a  three foot  glittering-edged
scythe, but decided, on balance, no. 
   ‘/Don’t pick it up, pick it up, pick i --/ 
   ‘/Don’t pick it up, pick it up, pick i --/’ 
   He was  seething at  himself at  last. He had not been able to seethe
at himself properly  over  the  death of his client  because it was  too
huge and horrific a  burden to bear.  But now he  had been humiliated by
Gilks, and found  himself in too  wobbly and disturbed a state  to fight
back, so he was able to seethe at himself about that. 
   He turned  sharply  away from his  tormentor and let himself out into
the patio garden to be alone with his seethings. 
   The patio was a  small, paved, west-facing area at the rear which was
largely deprived of light,  cut off  as it was by the  high back wall of
the  house and  by the high wall of some industrial building that backed
on  to the rear. In  the middle of it stood, for who knew  what possible
reason,  a  stone sundial. If any light  at  all fell on the sundial you
would  know  that it  was pretty close  to  noon, GMT.  Other than that,
birds perched on it. A few plants sulked in pots. 
   Dirk jabbed  a cigarette in  his mouth and burnt a lot of the end  of
it fiercely. 
   ‘/Don’t pick it up, pick it up, pick i --/ 
   ‘/Don’t  pick it up, pick it up, pick i --/’ still nagged from inside
the house. 
   Neat  garden  walls  separated the  patio  on  either side  from  the
gardens  of neighbouring houses. The one to the left  was  the same size
as this one, the one to the  right extended a little further, benefiting
from  the  fact that  the industrial  building finished flush  with  the
intervening garden wall.  There was an  air of  well-kemptness.  Nothing
grand, nothing flashy, just a sense that  all was  well  and that upkeep
on  the houses  was no problem. The house to the right,  in  particular,
looked as if  it had had its brickwork repointed quite recently, and its
windows reglossed. 
   Dirk took a large gulp of air and stood for a second staring  up into
what could be  seen of the  sky, which was grey and hazy. A single  dark
speck  was  wheeling  against the underside  of the clouds. Dirk watched
this  for a while, glad of any  focus for  his thoughts  other  than the
horrors of the room  he  had just left. He was vaguely  aware of comings
and  goings  within the  room,  of  a certain  amount  of tape-measuring
happening,  of a feeling that  photographs were  being  taken,  and that
severed-head-removal activities were taking place. 
   ‘/Don’t pick it up, pick it up, pick i --/
   ‘/Don’t pick it up, pick it up, pick i --/
   ‘/Don’t pi --/’ 
   Somebody at  last  picked it up, the nagging  repetition was at  last
hushed,  and  now  the gentle  sound  of a  distant  television  floated
peacefully on the noontime air. 
   Dirk,  however,  was having a great  deal of difficulty in  taking it
all in. He  was  much more aware of taking  a succession of huge  swimmy
whacks to the  head,  which were the  assaults of guilt.  It was not the
normal  background-noise type of guilt that comes  from just being alive
this far into  the twentieth century, and which Dirk was  usually fairly
adept  at dealing  with. It  was an  actual  stunning  sense  of,  ‘this
specific terrible thing is specifically and terribly my fault’.  All the
normal mental moves  wouldn’t  let him get  out of the  path of the huge
pendulum.  /Wham/  it  came  again, /whizz/,  /wham/,  again and  again,
/wham/, /wham/, /wham/. 
   He  tried to remember  any of  the details  of what  his late  client
(/wham, wham/)  had said  (/wham/) to him (/wham/),  but it was (/wham/)
virtually  impossible  (/wham/)  with  all  this  whamming  taking place
(/wham/).  The man had  said (/wham/)  that (Dirk  took a  deep  breath)
(/wham/)  he  was  being pursued (/wham/)  by  (/wham/)  a large, hairy,
green-eyed monster armed with a scythe. 
   /Wham!/ 
   Dirk had secretly smiled to himself about this. 
   /Whim, wham, whim, wham, whim, wham!/ 
   And had thought, ‘What a silly man.’ 
   /Whim, whim, whim, whim, wham!/ 
   A scythe (/wham/), and a contract (/wham/). 
   He hadn’t known,  or even  had  the  faintest  idea as  to  what  the
contract was for. 
   ‘Of course,’ Dirk had thought (/wham/). 
   But he had a vague feeling that it might have something to do  with a
potato. There was a bit of  a complicated story attached to that (/whim,
whim, whim/). 
   Dirk had  nodded  seriously  at  this  point  (/wham/),  and  made  a
reassuring tick (/wham/)  on a pad which he  kept  on his  desk (/wham/)
for the  express purpose of making reassuring  ticks  on  (/wham,  wham,
wham/).  He  had prided  himself at that  moment  on having  managed  to
convey the impression that  he had made  a tick  in a  small box  marked
‘Potatoes’. 
   /Wham, wham, wham, wham!/
   Mr  Anstey had  said he would explain further about the potatoes when
Dirk arrived to carry out his task. 
   And Dirk had  promised (/wham/),  easily (/wham/), casually (/wham/),
with an airy  wave of his hand (/wham, wham, wham/), to be there at six-
thirty in  the morning  (/wham/), because the contract (/wham/) fell due
at seven o’clock. 
   Dirk remembered  having  made  another  tick  in  a  notional ‘Potato
contract falls due at 7.00 a.m.’ box. (/Wh.../) 
   He  couldn’t handle  all  this  whamming any  more. He couldn’t blame
himself for what had  happened. Well,  he could.  Of course he could. He
did. It  was, in  fact,  his  fault  (/wham/).  The  point  was that  he
couldn’t continue to blame  himself for  what  had  happened  and  think
clearly about it, which he was going to  have  to do.  He  would have to
dig  this horrible thing (/wham/)  up  by the roots, and if he was going
to be fit to do that he had somehow to divest  himself (/wham/) of  this
whamming. 
   A  huge  wave  of  anger  surged  over him  as  he  contemplated  his
predicament and the  tangled distress  of his life.  He hated this  neat
patio. He hated all  this sundial  stuff, and  all  these neatly painted
windows, all these  hideously trim roofs. He  wanted to  blame it all on
the  paintwork  rather  than  on himself,  on the revoltingly tidy patio
paving-stones,  on  the  sheer  disgusting  abomination  of  the  neatly
repointed brickwork. 
   ‘Excuse me...’ 
   ‘What?’ He whirled round, caught unawares by  this intrusion into his
private raging of a quiet polite voice. 
   ‘Are   you   connected   with...?’   The   woman  indicated  all  the
unpleasantness and the lower-ground-floorness and the  horrible  sort of
policeness of  things next door  to her with a little floating  movement
of her wrist. Her wrist wore  a red bracelet which matched the frames of
her glasses. She was looking  over the garden wall from the house on the
right, with an air of slightly anxious distaste. 
   Dirk glared at her speechlessly.  She looked about forty-somethingish
and neat, with an instant  and unmistakable quality of advertising about
her. 
   She gave a troubled sigh. 
   ‘I know it’s  probably all  very  terrible and everything,’ she said,
‘but  do  you  think it will take long?  We  only called in  the  police
because the noise  of that ghastly record  was  driving us up the  wall.
It’s all a bit...’ 
   She gave him  a look of silent appeal, and Dirk decided that it could
all be her fault.  She could, as far as he was concerned, take the blame
for  everything while he sorted it out. She  deserved it,  if  only  for
wearing a bracelet like that. 
   Without a word, he turned his  back on  her, and took  his  fury back
inside the  house where it began rapidly  to  freeze into something hard
and efficient. 
   ‘Gilks!’  he said.  ‘Your  smart-alec  suicide theory. I like  it. It
works for me.  And  I think I see  how the clever bastard pulled it off.
Bring me pen. Bring me paper.’ 
   He  sat  down with a flourish at the cherrywood farmhouse table which
occupied the centre of the rear  portion of the room and deftly sketched
out a scheme of events which involved a  number of household  or kitchen
implements, a  swinging,  weighted  light  fitting,  some  very  precise
timing,  and  hinged  on  the  vital fact that the  record turntable was
Japanese. 
   ‘That should  keep your forensic chaps happy,’ said  Dirk  briskly to
Gilks. The forensic chaps glanced at it, took in its salient  points and
liked them. They  were  simple, implausible, and of exactly that  nature
which  a coroner who liked the same  sort of  holidays in Marbella which
they did would be sure to relish. 
   ‘Unless,’ said Dirk casually, ‘you  are interested in the notion that
the  deceased  had entered into  some kind of diabolical contract with a
supernatural agency for which payment was now being exacted?’ 
   The  forensic  chaps glanced  at each  other and  shook  their heads.
There was a strong sense  from them that the  morning was wearing on and
that this kind of talk was  only introducing  unnecessary  complications
into a case which otherwise could be well behind them before lunch. 
   Dirk made  a satisfied shrug, peeled  off his share of  the  evidence
and, with  a final nod  to the constabulary, made his way back upstairs.
   As  he reached the hallway, it  suddenly became apparent to him  that
the gentle sounds  of day-time television which he had heard from out in
the  garden  had previously  been  masked from  inside by the  insistent
sound of the record stuck in its groove. 
   He was surprised now to  realise  that they were in  fact coming from
somewhere upstairs in this house.  With  a quick  look round to see that
he  was  not  observed  he stood  on the bottom  step  of  the staircase
leading to  the  upstairs floors of  the house and  glanced  up  them in
surprise. 
   
   
[::: CHAPTER 6 ::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::]
   
   The  stairs were  carpeted with a tastefully austere matting type  of
substance.  Dirk  quietly made  his way up  them,  past  some tastefully
dried large things in a pot  that stood on the first landing, and looked
into  the rooms on the first floor. They, too,  were tasteful and dried.
   The  larger of the two  bedrooms  was  the only one  that  showed any
signs of current use. It had  clearly been designed to allow the morning
light to  play on delicately  arranged  flowers and duvets stuffed  with
something like hay, but there was  a feeling that socks and used shaving
heads  were instead beginning to gather the room into their grip.  There
was  a  distinct absence of anything female in the room -- the same sort
of absence that a missing picture leaves behind  it on a wall. There was
an air of  tension and of  sadness  and of things needing to  be cleaned
out from under the bed. 
   The bathroom, which opened out from it,  had a gold  disc hung on the
wall in  front  of the  lavatory,  for  sales  of  five hundred thousand
copies of  a  record called /Hot Potato/  by a band called Pugilism  and
the Third Autistic Cuckoo. Dirk  had a vague recollection of having read
part  of  an  interview with the leader of the band (there were only two
of them, and one of  them was the leader) in a Sunday paper. He had been
asked about their name, and he  had said  that there was  an interesting
story about  it, though it turned  out not to be. ‘It can mean  whatever
people want  it to mean,’ he had added with a shrug from the sofa of his
manager’s office somewhere off Oxford Street. 
   Dirk  remembered  visualising  the journalist  nodding  politely  and
writing  this down. A vile knot  had formed in  Dirk’s  stomach which he
had eventually softened with gin. 
   ‘/Hot Potato/...’ thought  Dirk. It suddenly  occurred to him looking
at the gold  disc hanging in its red frame, that the record on which the
late  Mr  Anstey’s  head  had been  perched was obviously this one.  Hot
Potato. Don’t pick it up. 
   What could that mean? 
   Whatever people wanted it to mean, Dirk thought with bad grace. 
   The  other thing that he  remembered now about the interview was that
Pain (the  leader of  Pugilism and the Third Autistic  Cuckoo was called
Pain)  claimed  to have  written the  lyrics down more  or less verbatim
from a  conversation which  he  or somebody had overheard in a café or a
sauna or an  aeroplane or something  like that.  Dirk  wondered how  the
originators of the conversation  would  feel  to hear  their words being
repeated in the circumstances in which he had just heard them. 
   He  peered  more  closely  at  the label  in  the  centre of the gold
record.  At  the  top  of  the  label it said  simply,  ‘ARRGH!’,  while
underneath  the actual  title  were the writers’  credits  -- ‘Paignton,
Mulville, Anstey’. 
   Mulville  was  presumably  the  member  of  Pugilism  and  the  Third
Autistic Cuckoo who  wasn’t the leader. And Geoff  Anstey’s inclusion on
the  writing credits  of a major-selling single was  probably  what  had
paid  for this house. When Anstey had  talked about the  contract having
something  to do with /Potato/  he  had  assumed that Dirk knew what  he
meant. And he, Dirk, had as easily  assumed  that Anstey was blithering.
It  was very easy to assume that someone who  was  talking about  green-
eyed  monsters with  scythes was  also  blithering when  he talked about
potatoes. 
   Dirk  sighed to himself  with  deep uneasiness. He  took a dislike to
the neat way  the trophy was hanging  on  the wall  and  adjusted  it  a
little  so that it hung  at  a more humane and untidy  angle. Doing this
caused  an  envelope to  fall  out from behind  the  frame  and  flutter
towards the floor. Dirk tried  unsuccessfully to catch it. With an unfit
grunt he bent over and picked the thing up. 
   It was  a largish, cream envelope of rich,  heavy paper, roughly slit
open at one  end,  and resealed with Sellotape. In fact it  looked as if
it had been opened  and resealed with fresh layers  of tape many  times,
an  impression  which  was borne out by the number of names to which the
envelope had in its time  been  addressed --  each successively  crossed
out and replaced by another. 
   The last name  on it was that of Geoff  Anstey. At least Dirk assumed
it  was  the last  name because  it was  the only one that had  not been
crossed out, and crossed  out heavily. Dirk peered at some of the  other
names, trying to make them out. 
   Some memory  was stirred by a couple of the names which he could just
about discern, but  he needed to examine the envelope much more closely.
He had been meaning to buy himself a  magnifying glass ever since he had
become a detective, but  had never  got  around  to  it. He also did not
possess  a  penknife, so reluctantly  he decided that the  most  prudent
course  was to  tuck the  envelope away for  the  moment in one  of  the
deeper recesses of his coat and examine it later in privacy. 
   He glanced quickly  behind the frame of the  gold disc  to see if any
other goodies  might emerge  but was disappointed,  and  so he  quit the
bathroom and resumed his exploration of the house. 
   The other bedroom was  neat and soulless. Unused. A pine bed, a duvet
and  an old  battered  chest of drawers that had  been  revived by being
plunged into a vat of  acid were its main features. Dirk pulled the door
of  it  closed  behind  him, and  started to  ascend the small,  wobbly,
white-painted stairway that led up to an attic from which the  sounds of
Bugs Bunny could be heard. 
   At  the  top of the stairs was a minute  landing which opened  on one
side  into  a bathroom so  small that it  would best be used by standing
outside and  sticking into it whichever limb  you wanted  to  wash.  The
door to it  was kept ajar  by a length of green  hosepipe which  trailed
from the  cold  tap of the  wash-basin, out of the bathroom,  across the
landing and into the only other room here at the top of the house. 
   It was an  attic room with a severely pitched roof which offered only
a few spots where a  person of anything approaching average height could
stand up. 
   Dirk stood hunched  in the doorway and surveyed its contents, nervous
of what he might  find  amongst them. There  was  a  general  grunginess
about the  place. The curtains were closed and little light made it past
them  into  the room,  which  was  otherwise  illuminated  only  by  the
flickering  glow  of  an  animated  rabbit. An  unmade  bed  with  dank,
screwed-up sheets  was pushed  under a particularly  low  angle  of  the
ceiling. Part of the walls and the more nearly  vertical surfaces of the
ceiling were covered with pictures crudely cut out of magazines. 
   There didn’t  seem  to be  any  common theme  or  purpose behind  the
cuttings. As well as a couple of pictures of flashy German cars and  the
odd bra  advertisement, there  were also a badly torn picture of a fruit
flan,  part  of an  advertisement for  life insurance  and other  random
fragments which  suggested  they had been  selected and arranged  with a
dull, bovine indifference to any meaning that any  of them might have or
effect they might achieve. 
   The  hosepipe curled across  the  floor and led around the side of an
elderly armchair pulled up in front of the television set. 
   The rabbit rampaged. The glow of  his rampagings played on the frayed
edges  of  the  armchair.  Bugs was  wrestling  with the controls  of an
aeroplane which  was  plunging to  the ground.  Suddenly he saw a button
marked ‘Autopilot’  and pressed it. A cupboard opened and a robot  pilot
clambered out,  took one look at the situation and  baled out. The plane
hurtled  on towards the ground but, luckily, ran out of fuel just before
reaching it and so the rabbit was saved. 
   Dirk could also see the top of a head. 
   The  hair of this  head was dark, matted and greasy. Dirk  watched it
for a long, uneasy moment before  advancing slowly into  the room to see
what, if anything, it was attached to. His relief at discovering,  as he
rounded  the  armchair,  that  the  head was, after all, attached  to  a
living body  was  a  little marred by the  sight of the  living  body to
which it was attached. 
   Slumped in the armchair was a boy. 
   He was  probably about thirteen  or fourteen, and  although he didn’t
look ill  in any  specific physical way, he  was  definitely not  a well
person. His  hair  sagged on his head, his head sagged on his shoulders,
and he lay in  the armchair in a sort  of limp, crumpled way, as if he’d
been hurled  there  from a  passing train.  He  was  dressed merely in a
cheap leather jacket and sleeping-bag. 
   Dirk stared at him. 
   Who was he? What was a boy doing here watching television in  a house
where someone had just been decapitated?  Did he know what had happened?
Did  Gilks know about  him? Had Gilks even bothered  to come up here? It
was,  after all, several flights of stairs for  a busy policeman with  a
tricky suicide on his hands. 
   After  Dirk had been  standing  there  for twenty seconds or  so, the
boy’s eyes  climbed up towards him, failed utterly to acknowledge him in
any way  at all, and then  dropped  again  and  locked  back  on  to the
rabbit. 
   Dirk was unused to making  quite such a minuscule impact on  anybody.
He checked to be sure  that he did  have his huge leather coat  and  his
absurd red hat on and that  he was properly and dramatically silhouetted
by the light of the doorway. 
   He  felt  momentarily deflated  and  said,  ‘Er...’  by  way  of self
introduction,  but it didn’t  get  the  boy’s  attention. He didn’t like
this.  The kid  was deliberately  and maliciously watching television at
him. He frowned.  There  was  a  kind  of steamy tension building in the
room it seemed to  Dirk,  a  kind  of difficult, hissing quality  to the
whole air  of the place which he did not know how to respond to. It rose
in intensity  and  then suddenly  ended with  an abrupt click which made
Dirk start. 
   The boy unwound  himself like a slow, fat snake, leaned sideways over
the  far  side  of   the   armchair  and  made  some   elaborate  unseen
preparations which clearly involved, as  Dirk  now realised, an electric
kettle. When  he resumed his  earlier splayed  posture  it was with  the
addition of a plastic  pot  clutched in  his  right hand, from which  he
forked rubbery strands of steaming gunk into his mouth. 
   The  rabbit brought his affairs to  a conclusion and  gave way  to  a
jeering comedian who wished the viewers to buy a certain brand  of lager
on the basis  of  nothing better  than his own hardly disinterested say-
so. 
   Dirk felt that it  was time to make a slightly greater impression  on
the proceedings  than  he had  so far managed to do.  He stepped forward
directly into the boy’s line of sight. 
   ‘Kid,’ Dirk said in a tone that  he hoped would sound firm but gentle
and not in any way at all patronising  or affected or gauche, ‘I need to
know who --’
   He was distracted at that moment by the sight which met  him from the
new position  in  which  he  was  standing.  On the other  side  of  the
armchair  there was a large, half full catering-size box of Pot Noodles,
a  large,  half full  catering-size box  of Mars Bars, a half demolished
pyramid  of  cans of  soft  drink, and  the end  of  the  hosepipe.  The
hosepipe  ended  in  a plastic tap  nozzle, and was obviously  used  for
refilling the kettle. 
   Dirk had simply been going to  ask the boy who he was, but seen  from
this angle the family resemblance  was unmistakable. He was clearly  the
son of the  lately decapitated  Geoffrey Anstey. Perhaps this  behaviour
was  just  his  way of dealing  with shock. Or perhaps he  really didn’t
know what had happened. Or perhaps he... 
   Dirk hardly liked to think. 
   In fact he was finding it hard to  think clearly while the television
beside him was,  on behalf of a toothpaste manufacturing company, trying
to worry him deeply about some  of the things which might be going on in
his mouth. 
   ‘OK,’ he  said, ‘I don’t like to disturb you at what I know must be a
difficult and distressing time for you, but I need to know first  of all
if you actually realise  that this  is  a difficult and distressing time
for you.’ 
   Nothing. 
   All  right, thought Dirk, time  for a little judicious  toughness. He
leant back  against the wall,  stuck his hands in his pockets in  an OK-
if-that’s-the-way-you-want-to-play-it  manner,  stared  moodily  at  the
floor  for a few seconds, then swung his head up and let the  boy have a
hard look right between the eyes. 
   ‘I have to tell you, kid,’ he said tersely, ‘your father’s dead.’ 
   This  might have worked if  it  hadn’t  been for a  very  popular and
long-running commercial which started  at that moment. It seemed to Dirk
to be a particularly astounding example of the genre. 
   The  opening  sequence  showed the angel  Lucifer  being  hurled from
heaven into the pit of hell  where he then lay on a burning lake until a
passing demon  arrived and gave him a can of a fizzy  soft drink  called
/sHades/.  Lucifer took  it and tried it.  He greedily guzzled the whole
contents of the can and then turned  to camera, slipped  on some Porsche
design  sunglasses,  said, ‘Now we’re /really/  cookin’!’  and lay  back
basking in the glow of the burning coals being heaped around him. 
   At  that point  an  impossibly deep and  growly American voice, which
sounded  as if it had itself crawled from the pit of  hell,  or at least
from a Soho  basement drinking club to which it was keen  to  return  as
soon as possible to marinade itself into shape for the  next voice-over,
said, ‘/sHades/. The Drink  from Hell...’ and the can revolved a  little
to obscure the initial ‘/s/’, and thus spell ‘Hades’. 
   The theology of  this  seemed  a little confused, reflected Dirk, but
what was  one tiny  extra droplet  of misinformation in  such  a  raging
torrent? 
   Lucifer  then  mugged  at the camera again and said,  ‘I could really
/fall/ for this stuff...’ and just in  case the viewer had been rendered
completely  insensate by  all  these  goings-on,  the  opening  shot  of
Lucifer  being  hurled  from heaven was  briefly  replayed  in order  to
emphasise the word ‘fall’. 
   The boy’s attention was entirely captivated by this. 
   Dirk squatted down in between the boy and the screen. 
   ‘Listen to me,’ he began. 
   The boy craned his neck round  to  look past Dirk  at  the screen. He
had to redistribute his  limbs in the chair in order  to  be able to  do
this and continue to fork Pot Noodle into himself. 
   ‘Listen,’ insisted Dirk again. 
   Dirk felt he  was  beginning to be in  serious  danger of losing  the
upper hand  in the situation. It  wasn’t merely that the boy’s attention
was on  the  television, it was that nothing  else  seemed to  have  any
meaning or  independent existence  for  him at  all. Dirk was  merely  a
featureless object in the way of the television.  The boy seemed to bear
him no malice, he merely wished to see past him. 
   ‘Look, can we turn this off  for a moment?’ Dirk  said,  and he tried
not to make it sound testy. 
   The boy did not respond.  Maybe there was a  slight stiffening of the
shoulders, maybe  it was a shrug. Dirk turned around  and was at  a loss
to  find which button  to  push to turn  the  television off. The  whole
control panel seemed to be  dedicated to the  single  purpose of keeping
itself  turned on -- there was no single button marked  ‘on’  or  ‘off’.
Eventually  Dirk  simply disconnected the  set from the  power socket on
the wall and turned back to the boy, who broke his nose. 
   Dirk felt his septum crunching  from the terrific impact of the boy’s
forehead  as  they both  toppled heavily  backwards against the set, but
the noise of the bone breaking, and the noise of his  own cry of pain as
it broke was completely obliterated by the  howling screams of rage that
erupted  from  the boy’s  throat.  Dirk flailed  helplessly  to  try and
protect himself from the fury  of the onslaught, but the boy was on  top
with  his elbow  in Dirk’s  eye, his  knees  pounding  first  on  Dirk’s
ribcage, then  his  jaw and  then on Dirk’s already traumatised nose, as
he scrambled over him to reconnect the  power to the television. He then
settled back comfortably into the armchair and watched with a  moody and
unsettled eye as the picture reassembled itself. 
   ‘You could at least have waited for the  news,’  he said  in  a  dull
voice. 
   Dirk  gaped  at  him. He  sat  huddled on  the  floor,  coddling  his
bleeding nose in  his hands, and gaped  at the monstrously disinterested
creature. 
   ‘Whhfff...fffmmm...nnggh!’ he  protested,  and  then  gave up for the
time being, while he probed his nose for the damage. 
   There  was definitely  a wobbly bit that clicked nastily between  his
fingers,  and  the  whole  thing  seemed  suddenly  to  be   a  horribly
unfamiliar shape. He fished a handkerchief out of his  pocket  and  held
it up to his face. Blood spread  easily  through it. He staggered to his
feet,  brushed aside non-existent offers  of  help,  stomped out  of the
room and into the tiny  bathroom. There, he yanked the hosepipe  angrily
off the tap, found a towel, soaked  it in cold  water and held it to his
face for a minute or two until the flow of blood  gradually  slowed to a
trickle and  stopped. He stared at himself  in the mirror. His  nose was
quite  definitely  leaning at a slightly  rakish angle. He tried bravely
to  shift  it,  but  not  bravely  enough.  It  hurt  abominably,  so he
contented  himself  with dabbing at it a little more  with the wet towel
and swearing quietly. 
   Then he stood there for a  second or two  longer, leaning against the
basin,  breathing heavily, and practising saying  ‘All  right!’ fiercely
into  the  mirror.  It came  out as  ‘Aww-bwigh!’  and  lacked  any real
authority. When  he felt sufficiently braced, or  at  least as braced as
he  was likely  to  feel in the  immediate future, he turned and stalked
grimly back into the den of the beast. 
   The beast was sitting quietly absorbing  news of some of the exciting
and stimulating  game  shows  that  the  evening  held  in store for the
determined viewer, and did not look up as Dirk re-entered. 
   Dirk walked  briskly over to the window and drew the curtains sharply
back, half hoping that the  beast might shrivel up shrieking if  exposed
to daylight, but other than wrinkling up its nose, it did  not react.  A
dark  shadow flapped briefly across  the window, but the angle  was such
that Dirk could not see what caused it. 
   He  turned and  faced the  boy-beast.  The midday  news  bulletin was
starting on  television, and the boy  seemed somehow a little more open,
a little more  receptive to the  world  outside  the flickering coloured
rectangle. He glanced up at Dirk with a sour, tired look. 
   ‘Whaddayawananyway?’ he said. 
   ‘I  ted you  whad  I  wad,’  said  Dirk, fiercely but  hopelessly, ‘I
wad...hag od a bobed...I gnow thad faith!’ 
   Dirk’s  attention had  switched  suddenly  to  the television screen,
where a rather more up-to-date photograph of the missing airline  check-
in girl was being shown. 
   ‘Whadayadoingere?’ said the boy. 
   ‘Jjchhhhh!’  said Dirk, and perched himself down  on  the  arm of the
chair, peering intently at  the  face  on  the screen. It had been taken
about  a year ago, before the girl had learnt about corporate  lipgloss.
She had frizzy hair and a frumpy, put-upon look. 
   ‘Whoareyou? Wassgoinon?’ insisted the boy. 
   ‘Loog, chuddub,’ snapped Dirk, ‘I’b tryid to wodge dthith!’ 
   The newscaster  said  that  the  police  professed themselves  to  be
mystified  by  the fact that there  was no trace  of Janice Smith at the
scene of  the incident. They  explained  that  there was  a limit to the
number of times they could search the  same buildings, and  appealed for
anyone who might have a clue as to her whereabouts to come forward. 
   ‘Thadth   by  segradry!  Thadth  Mith  Pearth!’   exclaimed  Dirk  in
astonishment. 
   The  boy was  not  interested  in Dirk’s  ex-secretary, and  gave  up
trying to  attract Dirk’s attention. He wriggled out of the sleeping-bag
and sloped off to the bathroom. 
   Dirk sat  staring  at  the  television,  bewildered  that  he  hadn’t
realised before who the  missing  girl was. Still,  there was no  reason
why he should have  done, he realised.  Marriage  had  changed her name,
and this  was  the first time they had shown a photograph that  actually
identified  her.  So far he  had  taken no real  interest in the strange
incident at the airport, but now it demanded his attention. 
   The explosion was now officially designated an ‘Act of God’. 
   But, thought Dirk, what god? And why? 
   What god  would  be  hanging around Terminal Two of Heathrow  Airport
trying to catch the 15.37 flight to Oslo? 
   After the miserable lassitude of  the last few weeks, he suddenly had
a great deal that required his  immediate attention. He frowned  in deep
thought  for a few moments, and  hardly noticed when the beast-boy snuck
back in  and  snuggled back into  his sleeping-bag just in time  for the
advertisements to  start. The first one showed  how a perfectly ordinary
stock cube  could form the natural focus of a normal, happy family life.
   Dirk  leapt  to  his  feet,  but  even  as  he  was  about  to  start
questioning the boy again his  heart sank as he looked at him. The beast
was far away,  sunk back in his dark, flickering lair,  and Dirk did not
feel inclined to disturb him again at the moment. 
   He contented  himself with barking at the  unresponding child that he
would  be  back, and  bustled heavily down the stairs,  his  big leather
coat flapping madly behind him. 
   In the hallway he encountered the loathed Gilks once more. 
   ‘What happened  to  you?’ said  the policeman sharply, catching sight
of Dirk’s bruised and bulging nose. 
   ‘Ondly whad  you  dold me,’  said Dirk, innocently.  ‘I bead  bythelf
ub.’ 
   Gilks demanded to  know what he  had  been doing, and Dirk generously
explained  that  there  was a witness  upstairs  with  some  interesting
information to impart. He suggested that  Gilks go  and have a word with
him, but that it would be best if he turned off the television first. 
   Gilks  nodded curtly.  He started  to go  up  the  stairs,  but  Dirk
stopped him. 
   ‘Doedth eddydthig dthrike you adth dthraydge aboud  dthidth  houdth?’
he said. 
   ‘What did you say?’ said Gilks in irritation. 
   ‘Subbthig dthraydge,’ said Dirk. 
   ‘Something what?’ 
   ‘Dthraydge!’ insisted Dirk. 
   ‘Strange?’ 
   ‘Dthadth right, dthraydge.’ 
   Gilks shrugged. ‘Like what?’ he said. 
   ‘Id dtheemdth to be cobbleedly dthouledth.’ 
   ‘Completely what?’ 
   ‘Dthouledth!’ he  tried again.  ‘Thoul-leth!  I dthigg dthadth dverry
idderedthigg!’ 
   With that he doffed  his hat politely,  and swept on out of the house
and up the street,  where an eagle swooped  out of  the  sky  at him and
came within  a whisker of causing him to  fall under a 73 bus on its way
south. For the next twenty minutes, hideous  yells  and screams emanated
from the top floor of the house in Lupton  Road, and caused much tension
among  the  neighbours.  The  ambulance  took  away the upper and  lower
remains of Mr  Anstey and  also a policeman with a  bleeding face. For a
short while after this, there was quietness. 
   Then  another police car drew  up  outside the house. A lot of ‘Bob’s
here’ type of remarks floated from the house, as an extremely  large and
burly policeman heaved  himself out of the car and bustled up the steps.
A few minutes and a great deal  of screaming  and  yelling later  he re-
emerged  also  clutching  his face,  and  drove  off  in  deep  dudgeon,
squealing his tyres in a violent and unnecessary manner. 
   Twenty  minutes  later  a  van  arrived  from  which  emerged another
policeman carrying a tiny pocket television  set. He entered the  house,
and re-emerged  a short while  later leading a docile  thirteen-year-old
boy, who was content with his new toy. 
   Once all policemen had departed, save for the single squad car  which
remained parked outside  to keep watch  on  the house,  a  large, hairy,
green-eyed  figure  emerged  from its  hiding place  behind one  of  the
molecules in the large basement room. 
   It  propped its scythe  against one  of the hi-fi speakers, dipped  a
long, gnarled  finger in  the  almost  congealed pool of blood  that had
collected on the  deck  of the turntable, smeared the finger across  the
bottom of  a sheet  of thick, yellowing paper, and then  disappeared off
into  a dark and hidden otherworld whistling a strange and  vicious tune
and returning only briefly to collect its scythe. 
   
   
[::: CHAPTER 7 ::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::]
   
   A little earlier in the morning,  at a comfortable distance from  all
these events, set  at  a  comfortable  distance from a well-proportioned
window through  which  cool  mid-morning  light  was streaming,  lay  an
elderly  one-eyed  man  in a white  bed.  A newspaper  sat like  a half-
collapsed tent on the  floor,  where  it  had  been  hurled  two minutes
before,  at shortly after ten o’clock by the clock on the bedside table.
   The  room  was not large, but was furnished in excessively bland good
taste, as if it were a room in an expensive private  hospital or clinic,
which  is exactly what it was -- the Woodshead Hospital, set  in its own
small  but well-kempt grounds on the outskirts of a small but well-kempt
village in the Cotswolds. 
   The man was awake but not glad to be. 
   His skin was very delicately old,  like finely stretched, translucent
parchment,  delicately  freckled.   His   exquisitely  frail  hands  lay
slightly  curled  on the  pure  white  linen  sheets and  quivered  very
faintly. 
   His name was variously  given as Mr Odwin,  or Wodin, or Odin. He was
-- is  -- a god,  and furthermore he was that least good of  all gods to
be alongside, a cross god. His one eye glinted. 
   He was  cross because  of what he had been reading in the newspapers,
which was that another  god had been cutting loose and making a nuisance
of himself. It didn’t say that  in the papers, of course. It didn’t say,
‘God cuts  loose, makes  nuisance  of  himself  in airport,’  it  merely
described  the  resulting  devastation  and was  at  a loss to draw  any
meaningful conclusions from it. 
   The story had been deeply  unsatisfactory in  all sorts of  ways,  on
account of  its  perplexing inconclusiveness,  its going-nowhereness and
the  irritating (from  the newspapers’ point of  view) lack of any  good
solid carnage. There was of course a  mystery  attached  to the  lack of
carnage, but a newspaper preferred  a good  whack of  carnage  to a mere
mystery any day of the week. 
   Odin, however,  had no such difficulty in knowing  what was going on.
The  accounts had ‘Thor’ written all over them in  letters much  too big
for anyone other  than another god to see. He had  thrown this morning’s
paper  aside in  irritation, and was  now trying  to concentrate  on his
relaxation exercises in order to avoid getting  too disturbed  about all
this. These involved breathing in in a  certain way and breathing out in
a certain other way and were good for his  blood  pressure and so on. It
was not  as if he was about to die or anything  -- ha!  -- but there was
no  doubt that at his time of life -- ha! -- he preferred to take things
easy and look after himself. 
   Best of all he liked to sleep. 
   Sleeping was  a very important  activity  for  him. He liked to sleep
for longish  periods, great  swathes of time.  Merely sleeping overnight
was  not taking the business seriously. He  enjoyed a good night’s sleep
and wouldn’t  miss  one  for  the world,  but he  didn’t  regard  it  as
anything  even half approaching enough. He  liked to  be asleep  by half
past eleven in the morning if possible, and  if that could come directly
after a  nice leisurely lie-in then so  much the better.  A little light
breakfast  and  a  quick  trip  to  the bathroom  while fresh linen  was
applied to his  bed is  really all  the activity  he liked to undertake,
and he  took care that it  didn’t jangle the sleepiness  out  of him and
thus disturb  his afternoon of  napping.  Sometimes he was able to spend
an entire week  asleep, and this he regarded  as  a good snooze.  He had
also slept through the whole of 1986 and hadn’t missed it. 
   But he knew to his deep disgruntlement that  he would shortly have to
arise  and undertake a sacred and irritating trust.  Sacred, because  it
was godlike,  or at  least involved  gods, and irritating because of the
particular god that it involved. 
   Sneakily, he twitched the curtains at a distance,  using  nothing but
his divine  will.  He sighed heavily.  He needed  to think and, what was
more, it was time for his morning visit to the bathroom. 
   He rang for the orderly. 
   The orderly arrived promptly in  his  well-pressed loose green tunic,
good-morninged cheerfully,  and bustled around locating bedroom slippers
and dressing-gown. He  helped Odin out of bed,  which was  a little like
rolling  a stuffed  crow out of  a box,  and escorted  him slowly to the
bathroom.  Odin walked  stiffly,  like  a head  hung  between  two heavy
stilts  draped in striped Viyella  and white towelling. The orderly knew
Odin as Mr  Odwin,  and didn’t  realise that he  was a  god,  which  was
something  that Odin tended  to keep quiet about, and wished  that  Thor
would too. 
   Thor  was  the God of  Thunder  and, frankly, acted like it.  It  was
inappropriate. He seemed unwilling,  or unable, or maybe just too stupid
to  understand or accept...Odin stopped  himself.  He sensed that he was
beginning mentally to rant. He would  have  to consider calmly what next
to  do about Thor, and he was on his  way to the right place for a  good
think. 
   As soon as Odin  had  completed  his stately  hobble to  the bathroom
door,  two  nurses hurried  in  and  stripped  and  remade the  bed with
immense  precision, patting  down  the  fresh  linen, pulling  it  taut,
turning it and tucking it. One  of  the nurses, clearly  the senior, was
plump  and matronly, the other younger, darker  and more generally bird-
like. The newspaper  was whisked  off the floor and neatly refolded, the
floor  was  briskly Hoovered, the curtains hooked back, the flowers  and
the  untouched fruit replaced  with fresh  flowers and  fresh fruit that
would, like every piece of fruit before them, remain untouched. 
   When after a  little while  the old god’s  morning ablutions had been
completed  and   the  bathroom   door  reopened,   the   room  had  been
transformed.  The actual  differences  were  tiny,  of  course, but  the
effect  was  of a subtle  but magical transformation into something cool
and  fresh. Odin  nodded  in quiet satisfaction to  see it.  He  made  a
little  show of inspecting the  bed, like a monarch inspecting a line of
soldiers. 
   ‘Is it well tucked?’ he asked in his old and whispery voice. 
   ‘It  is  very  well tucked, Mr Odwin,’  said the senior nurse with an
obsequious beam. 
   ‘Is it neatly turned?’ It clearly was. This was merely a ritual. 
   ‘Turned very  neatly indeed, Mr Odwin,’ said the nurse, ‘I supervised
the turning down of the sheets myself.’ 
   ‘I’m glad of that,  Sister Bailey, very glad,’ said Odin. ‘You have a
fine  eye for a trimly turned fold. It alarms me to know what I shall do
without you.’ 
   ‘Well, I’m not about to go anywhere, Mr  Odwin,’  said Sister Bailey,
oozing happy reassurance. 
   ‘But  you won’t  last for ever, Sister  Bailey,’ said Odin. It was  a
remark  that puzzled  Sister  Bailey  on the  times  she had  heard  it,
because of its apparent extreme callousness. 
   ‘Sure, and none  of us lasts for over, Mr Odwin,’ she said gently  as
she and  the  other  nurse  between  them managed the  difficult task of
lifting Odin back into bed while keeping his dignity intact. 
   ‘You’re  Irish  aren’t  you,  Sister Bailey?’  he asked,  once he was
properly settled. 
   ‘I am indeed so, Mr Odwin.’ 
   ‘Knew  an Irishman once.  Finn  something. Told me  a lot of stuff  I
didn’t need to know. Never told me about the linen. Still know now.’ 
   He  nodded curtly at this memory and lowered his head stiffly back on
to  the firmly plumped  up pillows  and  ran  the  back  of  his  finely
freckled hand over the folded-back linen sheet. Quite simply  he was  in
love with  linen. Clean, lightly  starched, white Irish  linen, pressed,
folded, tucked -- the words  themselves were  almost a  litany of desire
for him. In centuries  nothing had  obsessed him or moved him so much as
linen now did. He  could not for the life of him understand how he could
ever have cared for anything else. 
   Linen. 
   And sleep. Sleep and linen. Sleep in linen. Sleep. 
   Sister Bailey regarded him with  a sort  of proprietary fondness. She
did  not know that  he was a  god  as such,  in  fact she thought he was
probably an  old film producer or Nazi war criminal. Certainly he had an
accent she couldn’t quite place and his  careless civility,  his natural
selfishness and  his obsession with personal  hygiene  spoke  of a  past
that was rich with horrors. 
   If  she  could have  been  transported  to where  she might  see  her
secretive  patient enthroned, warrior  father  of  the  warrior  Gods of
Asgard, she  would  not have been  surprised. That is not quite true, in
fact. She would have  been startled quite out of her wits. But she would
at least have  recognised that it was consistent with  the qualities she
perceived  in him, once she had recovered from  the shock of discovering
that virtually  everything the human race had ever chosen  to believe in
was  true.  Or that it continued  to be true  long after the  human race
particularly needed it to be true any more. 
   Odin dismissed  his  medical attendants with a  gesture, having first
asked for his personal  assistant to be found and sent to him once more.
   This caused Sister Bailey  to tighten  her lips just  a very  little.
She  did  not  like  Mr Odwin’s  personal  assistant, general  factotum,
manservant, call him  what you  will.  His eyes were malevolent, he made
her   jump,  and  she  strongly  suspected  him  of  making  unspeakable
suggestions to her nurses during their tea breaks. 
   He had what Sister Bailey supposed  was what people meant by an olive
complexion, in  that it was extraordinarily close to being green. Sister
Bailey was convinced that it was not right at all. 
   She was of  course the last person to judge somebody by the colour of
their skin -- or if not absolutely  the last, she had  at least done  it
as recently as yesterday  afternoon  when  an  African diplomat had been
brought in  to have some  gallstones removed and  she  had conceived  an
instant  resentment  of  him.  She didn’t like  him.  She  couldn’t  say
exactly what it was she didn’t like about him, because she was a  nurse,
not a taxi-driver,  and  she wouldn’t let her personal feelings show for
an instant.  She was much  too  professional, much too good  at her job,
and treated everyone  with a more  or  less equal efficient and cheerful
courtesy, even, she thought --  and a profound iciness settled on her at
this point -- even Mr Rag. 
   ‘Mr Rag’ was the  name  of Mr  Odwin’s personal  assistant. There was
nothing she could do  about it. It  was not her  place  to  criticise Mr
Odwin’s  personal arrangements.  But if it had been her  business, which
it wasn’t, then she  would greatly  have preferred it, and not just  for
herself,  but  for  Mr Odwin’s own well-being  as  well,  which  was the
important thing, if he could  have employed someone who didn’t give  her
the absolute heebie-jeebies, that was all. 
   She  thought no more about it, merely went  to look for  him. She had
been relieved to  discover when she  came on  duty this morning that  Mr
Rag had left the premises the previous night, but had  then, with a keen
sense of disappointment, spotted him  returning about an hour or so ago.
   She  found  him  exactly  where  he was  not  supposed  to be. He was
squatting  on  one of  the seats  in the visitors’ waiting-room  wearing
what looked horribly like a soiled and discarded doctor’s gown that  was
much  too  big for  him. Not  only that,  but  he was playing  a  thinly
unmusical tune on a sort of  pipe that  he had obviously carved out of a
large disposable  hypodermic syringe which he absolutely should not have
had. 
   He glanced  up  at her  with  his  quick, dancing  eyes, grinned  and
continued to tootle and squeak, only significantly louder. 
   Sister  Bailey  ran through  in her  mind all the things that it  was
completely  pointless to say about  either the  coat or the  syringe, or
about  him  being  in the  visitors’  room frightening,  or preparing to
frighten, the visitors. She  knew she  wouldn’t be able to stand the air
of  injured innocence with which  he  would  reply,  or the preposterous
absurdity of his answers. Her only course was simply to  let it pass and
just  get  him  away  from  the room  and out of the  way as quickly  as
possible. 
   ‘Mr Odwin would like to see you,’ she said. She tried to jam  some of
her normal lilting quality into her voice, but it just  wouldn’t go. She
wished  his  eyes would stop  dancing like  that.  Apart from finding it
highly  disturbing from both a medical and  aesthetic  point of view she
also could not help but  be piqued  by  the impression it conveyed  that
there were at  least thirty-seven  things in  the room more  interesting
than her. 
   He gazed at her  in this disconcerting manner for a few seconds then,
muttering  that there  was  no  peace  for  the  wicked,  not  even  the
extremely  wicked, he  pushed past Sister Bailey and  skedaddled up  the
corridor to receive  instructions  from his lord  and  master,  quickly,
before his lord and master fell asleep. 
   
   
[::: CHAPTER 8 ::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::]
   
   By the end of the morning  Kate had discharged herself from hospital.
There were some initial difficulties involved in this  because first the
ward sister  and then the doctor  in charge  of Kate’s case were adamant
that she was  in no fit state to leave. She had only just emerged from a
minor coma and she needed care, she needed -- 
   ‘Pizza --’ insisted Kate.
   -- rest, she needed -- 
   ‘--  my own  home,  and  fresh  air. The  air in here is horrible. It
smells like a vacuum cleaner’s armpit.’ 
   --   further   medication,  and   should   definitely   remain  under
observation for  another  day or so until they  were satisfied  that she
had made a full recovery. 
   At least,  they were fairly adamant. During the course of the morning
Kate demanded  and got a telephone  and started trying to order pizza to
be  delivered  to  her  ward.  She  phoned around  all of  the least co-
operative pizza restaurants  she knew  in London,  harangued  them, then
made some noisily unsuccessful attempts to  muster  a  motorbike to roam
around  the West End and try  and pick up for her an American Hot with a
list  of  additional  peppers  and   mushrooms  and  cheeses  which  the
controller of the courier  service  refused even to attempt to remember,
and  after an  hour  or so of  this sort of behaviour the  objections to
Kate  discharging herself  from the  hospital gradually  fell away  like
petals from an autumn rose. 
   And so, a little after lunchtime, she  was  standing on a bleak  West
London street  feeling weak and  shaky but in charge of herself. She had
with  her  the empty, tattered remains of the garment  bag which she had
refused to relinquish, and also  a  small scrap of paper  in  her purse,
which had a single name scribbled on it. 
   She hailed a taxi and sat in  the  back with her eyes closed  most of
the way back to  her home  in Primrose Hill. She climbed up  the  stairs
and let herself into her top-floor flat. There were  ten messages on her
answering machine, which she simply erased without listening to. 
   She threw open the window in  her  bedroom and for  a moment  or  two
leaned out  of  it  at  the rather dangerous  and  awkward  angle  which
allowed her  to see a  patch of the park.  It  was a small corner patch,
with just a couple of  plane  trees standing in it. The backs of some of
the  intervening  houses framed it, or  rather, just  failed totally  to
obscure  it, and  made it very personal and  private  to Kate  in  a way
which a vast, sweeping vista would not have been. 
   On one occasion she had gone  to  this corner  of the park and walked
around  the invisible  perimeter that  marked out the limits of what she
could see,  and  had come very close to feeling  that this was  her  own
domain. She  had even patted the plane trees in  a proprietorial sort of
way, and  had then sat beneath  them  watching the  sun going down  over
London  --  over its badly spoiled skyline and its non-delivering  pizza
restaurants -- and had  come away with a profound sense of something  or
other,  though  she  wasn’t  quite certain  what.  Still,  she  had told
herself, these  days she should feel grateful for  a  profound sense  of
anything at all, however unspecific. 
   She hauled  herself in from the window, left it wide open in spite of
the chill of the outside  air,  padded through  into  the small bathroom
and ran the bath.  It was a bath of  the  sprawling Edwardian type which
took up  a wonderfully  disproportionate  amount of the space available,
and  encompassed most of the rest of  the room with cream-painted pipes.
The taps seethed. As soon as  the room was sufficiently full of steam to
be  warm,  Kate undressed  and then went  and opened the large  bathroom
cupboard. 
   She  felt faintly embarrassed  by the sheer profusion  of things  she
had for putting in baths,  but  she  was for  some  reason incapable  of
passing any  chemist or herb shop without going in to be seduced by some
glass-stoppered  bottle  of  something  blue or green or orange and oily
that  was  supposed  to  restore  the  natural  balance  of  some  vague
substance she didn’t even know she was supposed to have in her pores. 
   She paused, trying to choose. 
   Something pink? Something  with  extra Vitamin  B? Vitamin B12?  B13?
Just the number  of things with different types of Vitamin B in them was
an embarrassment  of  choice in itself.  There were powders  as well  as
oils,  tubes of gel, even packets of some kind of pungent smelling  seed
that was  meant to  be  good for some obscure part of you in some arcane
way. 
   How about some of  the green crystals? One day,  she had told herself
in the  past,  she would not  even  bother trying to  choose,  but would
simply  put a bit of everything in. When  she really felt in need of it.
She rather thought that  today was  the day, and  with a sudden reviving
rush of pleasure she set  about  putting a drop or two of  everything in
the  cupboard  into  the  seething  bath  until  it  was  confused  with
mingling, muddying colours and verging on the glutinous to touch. 
   She  turned off the taps, went to her  handbag  for  a  moment,  then
returned and lowered  herself into the bath, where she lay with her eyes
closed, breathing slowly for fully three minutes before  at last turning
her  attention to the scrap of paper she had  brought with  her from the
hospital. 
   It had  one word on it, and it was  a word  she had dragged out of an
oddly reluctant young  nurse who had taken her temperature that morning.
   Kate had questioned her about the big  man. The  big man whom she had
encountered  at the  airport,  whose body she had seen in a nearby  side
ward in the early hours of the night. 
   ‘Oh no,’  the nurse  had said, ‘he wasn’t dead.  He was  just in some
sort of coma.’ 
   Could she see him? Kate had asked. What was his name? 
   She  had  tried to ask  idly,  in  passing as  it were, which  was  a
difficult trick to pull  off with a thermometer in  her  mouth, and  she
wasn’t  at all certain she had succeeded.  The nurse  had said  that she
couldn’t  really  say,  she wasn’t  really  meant  to  talk about  other
patients. And anyway, the man wasn’t there any  more,  he had been taken
somewhere else.  They had sent an ambulance to collect  him and take him
somewhere else. 
   This had taken Kate considerably by surprise. 
   Where had they taken him? What was this special place?  But the nurse
had been  unwilling to say anything much more, and a second or two later
had been  summoned away by the Sister. The only word the nurse  had said
was the one that Kate had then scribbled down  on the piece of paper she
was now looking at. 
   The word was ‘Woodshead’. 
   Now  that she  was  more relaxed she had a feeling  that the name was
familiar  to  her in some way, though  she  could not remember where she
had heard it. 
   The  instant she  remembered, she  could  not  stay in  the bath  any
longer, but got out  and  made  straight for the telephone, pausing only
briefly to shower all the gunk off her. 
   
   
[::: CHAPTER 9 ::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::]
   
   The big  man awoke  and  tried to look up, but could hardly raise his
head.  He tried  to sit up but couldn’t do that either. He  felt  as  if
he’d been stuck to the floor with superglue and after a  few seconds  he
discovered the most astounding reason for this. 
   He  jerked his head up violently, yanking  out great tufts of  yellow
hair which stayed painfully stuck  to  the floor, and looked around him.
He was in what appeared to be  a derelict  warehouse, probably  an upper
floor  judging by the wintry sky  he could see  creeping past the grimy,
shattered windows. 
   The ceilings were high  and hung  with cobwebs built  by  spiders who
did not seem  to  mind  that most  of  what they  caught  was  crumbling
plaster  and  dust. They were  supported  by  pillars made from  upright
steel  joists  on  which  the dirty  old cream  paint  was  bubbled  and
flaking, and these in turn stood on a floor  of battered old  oak on  to
which he had clearly been glued. Extending  out for a foot or  two in  a
rough oval all around  his naked  body the  floor glistened  darkly  and
dully. Thin, nostril-cleaning fumes rose  from it. He could not  believe
it.  He  roared  with  rage, tried  to  wriggle  and shake  himself  but
succeeded only in tugging painfully at his skin where  it was stuck fast
to the oak planks. 
   This had to be the old man’s doing. 
   He threw  his head back hard against the floor in a blow that cracked
the  boards  and made  his  ears  sing.  He roared  again  and took some
furious satisfaction  in  making  as  much  hopeless, stupid noise as he
could. He  roared until the steel  pillars rang  and the cracked remains
of  the windows shattered into finer shards. Then, as  he threw his head
angrily from one side to  the other he caught sight of his sledge-hammer
leaning against the wall a few feet from him, heaved  it up into the air
with a  word, and  sent it hurtling round the  great space, beating  and
clanging on  every pillar until the  whole  building reverberated like a
mad gong. 
   Another word  and the hammer  flew back at  him, missed his head by a
hand’s-width  and  punched  straight down  through the floor, shattering
the wood and the plaster below. 
   In the darker  space beneath  him the hammer spun, and swung round in
a slow  heavy parabola as bits of  plaster  fell about it and rattled on
the  concrete floor below.  Then  it  gathered  a  violent  momentum and
hurtled  back up through  the ceiling, smacking up  a stack of  startled
splinters  as it punched  through  another oak floorboard a hand’s-width
from the soles of the big man’s feet. 
   It soared up into the air, hung there  for a moment as  if its weight
had suddenly vanished,  then, deftly  flicking its short handle up above
its  head, it  drove hard back  down through the floor again -- then  up
again,  then down again, punching holes in a  splintered ring around its
master  until,  with a  long  heavy groan,  the  whole oval  section  of
punctured floor gave  way and  plunged, twisting,  through  the air.  It
shattered  itself  against  the  floor below amidst  a rain  of  plaster
debris, from which  the figure of  the big man then emerged, staggering,
flapping at  the dusty air and coughing. His back, his arms and his legs
were still covered with great splintered hunks  of oak  flooring, but at
least he  was able to move. He leant the flat of  his hands  against the
wall and violently coughed some of the dust from his lungs. 
   As he turned  back, his  hammer  danced out of the  air  towards him,
then suddenly  evaded his grasp  and  skidded  joyfully  off across  the
floor striking sparks from the concrete with its  great head, flipped up
and parked itself against a nearby pillar at a jaunty angle. 
   In  front  of  him  the shape of a  large  Coca-Cola vending  machine
loomed through  the  settling cloud of  dust.  He  regarded  it with the
gravest suspicion  and  worry.  It stood there with a  sort  of  glazed,
blank  look to  it, and  had a note from his  father  stuck on the front
panel saying  whatever he was  doing, stop it. It was  signed ‘You-know-
who’,  but  this had been crossed out and first the word ‘Odin’ and then
in larger letters ‘Your Father’ had been substituted. Odin  never ceased
to   make   absolutely  clear   his  view  of   his  son’s  intellectual
accomplishments. The big man  tore the note  off  and  stared at  it  in
anger. A  postscript added  darkly ‘Remember Wales. You don’t want to go
through all that  again.’ He  screwed the note  up and hurled  it out of
the nearest window, where the wind whipped it  up and away. For a moment
he thought  he heard an  odd squeaking noise,  but it was probably  just
the blustering of  the wind as it whistled between  the nearby  derelict
buildings. 
   He turned and  walked  to  the  window and stared  out  of  it  in  a
belligerent sulk. Glued  to the floor. At his  age.  What  the devil was
that supposed to mean? ‘Keep your  head down,’ was  what he guessed. ‘If
you don’t  keep it  down,  I’ll have to keep it down  for you.’ That was
what it meant. ‘Stick to the ground.’ 
   He remembered now the old man saying exactly that to him  at the time
of all the unpleasantness with  the Phantom fighter jet. ‘Why can’t  you
just stick to the ground?’  he had said. He could imagine the old man in
his  soft-headed benign malice thinking it very funny to make the lesson
so literal. 
   Rage  began  to rumble menacingly inside him  but  he pushed  it down
hard.  Very  worrying  things had recently begun  happening when  he got
angry and he had a bad  feeling, looking back  at the  Coca-Cola vending
machine, that  another of  those  very worrying  things  must have  just
happened. He stared at it and fretted. 
   He felt ill. 
   He  had  felt ill  a  lot  of  late, and  he found  it  impossible to
discharge  what were  left  of  his godly  duties  when he  felt  he was
suffering  from  a  sort  of  continual low-grade  flu.  He  experienced
headaches, dizzy spells, guilt and  all the sorts of  ailments that were
featured  so  often  in  television  advertisements.  He  even  suffered
terrifying blackouts whenever the great rage gripped him. 
   He always used to have  such a  wonderful time  getting  angry. Great
gusts of marvellous anger would hurl him through life. He  felt huge. He
felt flooded  with power  and  light  and  energy.  He  had  always been
provided  with such wonderful things to get  angry about -- immense acts
of provocation or  betrayal,  people  hiding the Atlantic  ocean  in his
helmet, dropping continents on him or  getting  drunk  and pretending to
be trees.  Stuff you could really work up  a rage about and  hit things.
In short he had felt good about  being  a  Thunder God.  Now suddenly it
was  headaches,  nervous  tension, nameless  anxieties and  guilt. These
were new experiences for a god, and not pleasant ones. 
   ‘You look ridiculous!’ 
   The voice screeched out and affected Thor  like fingernails scratched
across  a blackboard lodged  in  the back of  his brain.  It was a  mean
voice,  a spiteful, jeering voice, a cheap white nylon shirt of a voice,
a  shiny-trousered pencil moustache of a voice, a voice, in short, which
Thor did not like. He reacted very badly  to  it  at  the best of times,
and was  particularly provoked to have to  hear  it while standing naked
in the  middle  of a decrepit warehouse with large  sections of  an  oak
floor still stuck to his back. 
   He spun round angrily. He wanted to be  able to turn round calmly and
with  crushing  dignity,  but no  such strategy  ever worked  with  this
creature, and since he, Thor, would only  end  up feeling humiliated and
ridiculous whatever posture he adopted, he might  as well go with one he
felt comfortable with. 
   ‘Toe Rag!’  he  roared, yanked his  hammer spinning into  the air and
hurled it with immense,  stunning force at the  small creature  who  was
squatting complacently in the shadows  on top of a small heap of rubble,
leaning forward a little. 
   Toe Rag caught the hammer and placed it neatly on top of the pile  of
Thor’s clothes that lay  next  to him. He grinned,  and  allowed a stray
shaft  of sunlight to glitter  on one of  his teeth. These things  don’t
happen  by  accident.  Toe  Rag  had  spent some  time  while  Thor  was
unconscious working out how long  it  would take him  to  recover,  then
industriously moving  the pile of rubble to  exactly this spot, checking
the height and then  calculating the exact angle at which to lean. As  a
provocateur he regarded himself as a professional. 
   ‘Did you do this to me?’ roared Thor. ‘Did you --’ 
   Thor searched  for any way  of  saying ‘glue  me  to the  floor’ that
didn’t  sound like ‘glue me to  floor’, but eventually the pause got too
long and he had to give up. 
   ‘-- glue  me  to the floor?’ he demanded at last. He wished he hadn’t
asked such a stupid question. 
   ‘Don’t even answer that!’  he added angrily and wished he hadn’t said
that either.  He  stamped  his  foot  and  shook the foundations of  the
building  a  little just to  make the point.  He wasn’t certain what the
point was, but he felt that it had to  be made. Some dust settled gently
around him. 
   Toe Rag watched him with his dancing, glittering eyes. 
   ‘I merely carry out the instructions  given to me by your father,’ he
said in a grotesque parody of obsequiousness. 
   ‘It seems  to me,’ said Thor, ‘that  the instructions  my father  has
been  giving since  you entered his service have been very odd. I  think
you  have some kind of evil grip on him. I don’t know what  kind of evil
grip  it  is,  but  it’s  definitely  a  grip,  and it’s  definitely...’
synonyms failed him ‘...evil,’ he concluded. 
   Toe Rag  reacted like an iguana to  whom  someone had just complained
about the wine. 
   ‘Me?’  he  protested. ‘How can I possibly have a grip on your father?
Odin is  the greatest  of  the  Gods  of Asgard, and  I  am his  devoted
servant in all things.  Odin says, “Do this,”  and  I do it.  Odin says,
“Go  there,” and I go there.  Odin  says, “Go and  get my big stupid son
out of  hospital  before he  causes any more trouble,  and then, I don’t
know, glue him  to the floor or something,” and I do exactly as he asks.
I am merely the  most  humble of  functionaries. However small or menial
the task, Odin’s bidding is what I am there to perform.’ 
   Thor  was not sufficiently  subtle a student of human  nature or, for
that matter, divine  or goblin nature, to be able to argue that this was
in  fact  a  very  powerful  grip  to hold over anybody, particularly  a
fallible and pampered old god. He just knew that it was all wrong. 
   ‘Well then,’  he shouted, ‘take this message back to my father, Odin.
Tell him that  I, Thor, the God of Thunder, demand to meet him. And  not
in his  damned  hospital  either! I’m  not going  to hang  about reading
magazines and looking at fruit while he has his  bed changed!  Tell  him
that Thor, the God of Thunder, will meet Odin,  the Father  of the  Gods
of Asgard, tonight, at the Challenging Hour in the Halls of Asgard!’ 
   ‘Again?’  said Toe Rag, with  a  sly glance sideways at the Coca-Cola
vending machine. 
   ‘Er, yes,’ said Thor. ‘Yes!’ he repeated in a rage. ‘Again!’ 
   Toe Rag made a tiny sigh, such  as  one who felt resigned to carrying
out  the bidding of  a temperamental  simpleton  might make,  and  said,
‘Well, I’ll tell him. I don’t suppose he will be best pleased.’ 
   ‘It  is  no matter  of  yours whether he is pleased or not!’  shouted
Thor, disturbing  the  foundations of the building  once  more. ‘This is
between my father  and myself!  You  may think yourself very clever, Toe
Rag, and you may think that I am not --’ 
   Toe Rag  arched  an  eyebrow. He had  prepared  for this  moment.  He
stayed  silent and  merely let the stray beam of sunlight glint  on  his
dancing eyes. It was a silence of the most profound eloquence. 
   ‘I may not know  what you’re up to, Toe Rag,  I may not know a lot of
things,  but I  do know  one thing. I know  that I am Thor,  the God  of
Thunder, and that I will not be made a fool of by a goblin!’ 
   ‘Well,’ said Toe Rag with a  light grin, ‘when you  know two things I
expect  you’ll  be  twice  as  clever.  Remember to put  your clothes on
before  you go out.’  He gestured  casually at the  pile  beside him and
departed. 
   
   
[::: CHAPTER 10 :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::]
   
   The  trouble with the sort of  shop that sells things like magnifying
glasses and  penknives is that they tend also to sell all kinds of other
fascinating things, like  the quite extraordinary device with which Dirk
eventually  emerged  after  having  been  hopelessly  unable  to  decide
between the knife  with the built-in Philips screwdriver, toothpick  and
ball-point  pen and the  one with the 13-tooth  gristle saw and the tig-
welded rivets. 
   The  magnifying glasses  had held  him  in thrall for  a short while,
particularly the  25-diopter,  high-index, vacuum-deposited, gold-coated
glass  model  with the  integral handle and mount and the notchless seal
glazing,  but  then  Dirk  had  happened  to  catch  sight  of  a  small
electronic I Ching calculator and he was lost. 
   He had never before even guessed  at the existence of  such a  thing.
And to  be  able  to  move  from  total ignorance of something to  total
desire for it, and then actually to own  the thing  all within the space
of about forty seconds was, for Dirk, something of an epiphany. 
   The electronic  I  Ching  calculator was badly made.  It had probably
been manufactured in whichever of  the South-East  Asian  countries  was
busy  tooling up to do to South Korea what South Korea was busy doing to
Japan.  Glue technology had obviously not progressed in  that country to
the  point  where things  could be  successfully held together  with it.
Already  the back had  half  fallen off and needed to  be stuck back  on
with Sellotape. 
   It was much  like an ordinary pocket calculator, except that the  LCD
screen was  a little larger  than  usual,  in  order to accommodate  the
abridged  judgements of  King Wen  on each of  the sixty-four hexagrams,
and also the commentaries of his son, the Duke of Chou,  on each of  the
lines of each  hexagram. These were unusual texts to see marching across
the display  of  a pocket  calculator,  particularly  as  they had  been
translated from  the Chinese via the Japanese and seemed to have enjoyed
many adventures on the way. 
   The  device also functioned  as an ordinary calculator, but only to a
limited  degree.  It  could handle any  calculation  which  returned  an
answer of anything up to ‘4’. 
   ‘1+1’ it could manage (‘2’),  and ‘1+2’ (‘3’) and ‘2+2’ (‘4’) or ‘tan
74’  (‘3.4874145’), but anything above  ‘4’ it represented merely as  ‘A
Suffusion of Yellow’. Dirk  was  not  certain if this was  a programming
error  or an insight beyond  his ability to  fathom,  but he  was  crazy
about it anyway, enough to hand over £20 of ready cash for the thing. 
   ‘Thank you,  sir,’  said the  proprietor.  ‘It’s a nice piece that. I
think you’ll be happy with it.’ 
   ‘I ab,’ said Dirk. 
   ‘Glad to hear it, sir,’ replied the proprietor. ‘Do you  know  you’ve
broken your nose?’ 
   Dirk looked up from fawning on his new possession. 
   ‘Yedth,’ he said testily, ‘obf courth I dknow.’ 
   The man nodded, satisfied. 
   ‘Just that a  lot of  my customers wouldn’t always know about a thing
like that,’ he explained. 
   Dirk thanked  him tersely and hurried out with  his purchase.  A  few
minutes  later  he took up  residence at the small corner  table  of  an
Islington café, ordered  a small  but  incredibly strong  cup of coffee,
and attempted  to take stock of his day. A moment’s reflection told  him
that he  was  almost  certainly  going  to  need a  small but incredibly
strong beer as well, and he attempted to add this to his order. 
   ‘A wha?’ said the waiter.  His  hair was  very  black and filled with
brilliantine. He was  tall, incredibly fit  and too  cool  to  listen to
customers or say consonants. 
   Dirk  repeated his  order,  but  what  with having the  café’s  music
system,  a  broken  nose, and the waiter’s  insuperable cool to  contend
with, he eventually found it simpler to write out the order on  a napkin
with a stub  of pencil.  The waiter peered at  it in an offended manner,
and left. 
   Dirk exchanged  a  friendly nod with  the girl sitting half reading a
book at the next  table, who had watched  this  exchange with  sympathy.
Then he set  about laying out his morning’s acquisitions on the table in
front  of him --  the  newspaper, the electronic I  Ching calculator and
the  envelope  which he  had  retrieved  from behind the  gold  disc  on
Geoffrey Anstey’s bathroom  wall. He then spent a  minute or two dabbing
at  his  nose with  a handkerchief, and prodding  it tenderly to see how
much it hurt,  which turned out to be quite a lot. He sighed and stuffed
the handkerchief back in his pocket. 
   A few  seconds later the waiter returned bearing a  herb omelette and
a  single  breadstick. Dirk  explained that  this  wasn’t  what  he  had
ordered. The waiter shrugged and said that it wasn’t his fault. 
   Dirk had  no  idea what  to say to this,  and  said  so. He was still
having a great deal of difficulty speaking. The waiter asked Dirk if  he
knew that he had broken his nose  and Dirk said  that yedth,  dthagg you
berry budge, he  did.  The waiter said  that  his friend  Neil  had once
broken  his nose and Dirk said that  he hobed it hurd like  hell,  which
seemed  to draw  the  conversation  to  a  close.  The waiter  took  the
omelette and left, vowing never to return. 
   When  the girl sitting at  the next table looked away  for  a moment,
Dirk leaned over and took  her coffee. He  knew  that  he  was perfectly
safe doing this  because she would simply not be able  to  believe  that
this had happened. He sat sipping at  the lukewarm cup  and  casting his
mind back over the day. 
   He knew that before consulting the I Ching,  even an electronic  one,
he should try  and compose his thoughts and allow them to settle calmly.
   This was a tough one. 
   However  much he  tried to  clear his  mind and think in a  calm  and
collected way, he was  unable  to stop Geoffrey  Anstey’s head revolving
incessantly in his  mind. It revolved disapprovingly, as if  pointing an
accusing  finger at  Dirk. The fact  that  it did not have  an  accusing
finger with  which to point only served to drive the point it was trying
to make home all the harder. 
   Dirk screwed up his  eyes and attempted to concentrate instead on the
problem of the mysteriously vanished Miss Pearce, but  was unable to get
much of a grip on it. When  she had used to work for him she would often
disappear mysteriously  for two or three days at  a time, but the papers
didn’t  make  any kind of fuss about it  then. Admittedly, there weren’t
things  exploding around her at  the time,  at least, not  that  he  was
aware of. She had never mentioned anything exploding particularly. 
   Furthermore,  whenever he thought of her face, which he had last seen
on the television set  in  Geoffrey Anstey’s house, his thoughts  tended
instantly to  sink towards  the  head which  was busy  revolving thirty-
three  and a third  times a minute three floors beneath it. This was not
conducive  to the calm  and  contemplative mood he was seeking. Nor  was
the very loud music on the café’s music system. 
   He sighed, and stared at the electronic I Ching calculator. 
   If he wanted to get  his thoughts into some kind of order then  maybe
chronological order would be as  good a  one as any. He decided to  cast
his  mind  back  to  the  beginning  of  the day,  before  any  of these
appalling things had happened,  or at least, before they’d  happened  to
him. 
   First there had been the fridge. 
   It  seemed  to  him  that  by  comparison with  everything else,  the
problem  of what  to  do  about  his fridge  had  now  shrunk  to fairly
manageable proportions.  It still  provoked a discernible twinge of fear
and  guilt, but  here, he  thought, was a problem which he could face up
to with relative calm. 
   The  little book  of  instructions suggested that  he  should  simply
concentrate  ‘soulfully’ on  the  question  which  was ‘besieging’  him,
write it down, ponder  on it,  enjoy the  silence, and then once he  had
achieved inner harmony and tranquillity he  should push the red  button.
   There wasn’t a  red button, but there was a blue button marked ‘Red’,
and this Dirk took to be the one. 
   He concentrated for a while on  the question, then looked through his
pockets for a piece of paper, but was unable to find one. In the  end he
wrote his  question,  ‘Should I buy  a  new fridge?’ on a corner of  his
napkin. Then he took the view that if he was going  to wait until he had
achieved  inner harmony and tranquillity he could be there all night, so
he went  ahead and pushed  the blue button marked ‘Red’ anyway. A symbol
flashed  up in a  corner of the screen, a  hexagram  which  looked  like
this: 
 
                           ======  ======
                           ==============
                           ======  ======
                           ======  ======
                           ======  ======
                           ==============

                              3 : CHUN

   The  I Ching calculator then scrolled this text  across its  tiny LCD
display: 
   ‘/THE JUDGEMENT OF KING WEN: 
   ‘Chun Signifies Difficulties At Outset, As Of Blade Of 
    Grass Pushing Up Against Stone. The Time Is Full Of 
    Irregularities And Obscurities: Superior Man Will Adjust 
    His Measures As In Sorting The Threads Of The Warp 
    And Woof. Firm Correctness Will Bring At Last Success. 
    Early Advances Should Only Be Made With Caution. 
    There Will Be Advantage In Appointing Feudal Princes. 
   ‘LINE 6 CHANGES: 
   ‘THE COMMENTARY OF THE DUKE OF CHOU: 
   ‘The Horses And The Chariot Obliged To Retreat. 
    Streams Of Bloody Tears Will Flow./’ 
   Dirk considered  this for a  few  moments, and then  decided that  on
balance it  appeared  to be  a vote in favour of getting the new fridge,
which, by  a  staggering coincidence, was the  course of action which he
himself favoured. 
   There  was a pay phone  in  one of  the  dark  corners  where waiters
slouched moodily at one  another. Dirk  threaded  his way  through them,
wondering whom it was  they  reminded him  of,  and eventually  deciding
that  it was the small crowd of  naked  men  standing  around behind the
Holy Family in Michelangelo’s  picture  of  the  same name,  for no more
apparent reason than that Michelangelo rather liked them. 
   He telephoned an acquaintance of  his  called Nobby Paxton, or so  he
claimed,  who worked the  darker side  of the  domestic appliance supply
business. Dirk came straight to the point. 
   ‘Dobby, I deed a fridge.’ 
   ‘Dirk, I been saving one against the day you’d ask me.’ 
   Dirk found this highly unlikely. 
   ‘Only I wand a good fridge you thee, Dobby.’ 
   ‘This is the best, Dirk. Japanese. Microprocessor controlled.’ 
   ‘What would a microprothethor be doing id a fridge, Dobby?’ 
   ‘Keeping  itself cool,  Dirk. I’ll  get the lads to  bring  it  round
right  away.  I  need  to  get  it off the premises pretty sharpish  for
reasons which I won’t trouble you with.’ 
   ‘I apprethiade thid, Dobby,’ said Dirk. ‘Problem id, I’m not  at home
at preddent.’ 
   ‘Gaining access to houses in the absence of their  owners is only one
of the panoply of skills with which my lads are blessed. Let me  know if
you find anything missing afterwards, by the way.’ 
   ‘I’d be happy  to, Dobby. Id  fact if your  ladth are  in a  mood for
carting thtuff off I’d be glad  if they would thtart with my old fridge.
It badly needth throwing away.’ 
   ‘I shall see that  it’s  done, Dirk. There’s usually a skip or two on
your street these days. Now,  do you expect  to  be  paying for  this or
shall I just get  you kneecapped straight  off,  save everybody time and
aggravation all round?’ 
   It was never one hundred per  cent  clear to Dirk  exactly when Nobby
was joking and he  was  not  keen to put it  to the test. He assured him
that he would pay him, as soon as next they met. 
   ‘See you very soon then, Dirk,’ said Nobby. ‘By  the way, do you know
you sound exactly as if someone’s broken your nose?’ 
   There was a pause. 
   ‘You there, Dirk?’ said Nobby. 
   ‘Yed,’ said Dirk. ‘I wad judd liddening to a reggord.’ 
   ‘/Hot Potato!/’ roared the hi-fi in the café. 
   ‘/Don’t pick it up, pick it up, pick it up,
   ‘Quick, pass it on, pass it on, pass it on./’
   ‘I said, do you  know  you sound  exactly as if someone’s broken your
nose?’ repeated Nobby. 
   Dirk said  that he did know this,  thanked Nobby for pointing it out,
said  goodbye,  stood  thoughtfully for  a  moment, made  another  quick
couple  of  phone  calls,  and then  threaded his  way back  through the
huddle  of  posing  waiters  to  find  the  girl  whose  coffee  he  had
appropriated sitting at his table. 
   ‘Hello,’ she said, meaningfully. 
   Dirk was as gracious as he knew how. 
   He bowed to her very politely, doffed  his hat, since all  this  gave
him  a  second or so to recover himself, and requested her permission to
sit down. 
   ‘Go  ahead,’ she said, ‘it’s your table.’ She gestured magnanimously.
   She  was  small,  her hair  was  neat and  dark, she  was in her mid-
twenties,  and was looking  quizzically at  the half-empty cup of coffee
in the middle of the table. 
   Dirk  sat down  opposite  her and leant forward  conspiratorially. ‘I
expeg,’  he  said in a low voice, ‘you are enquirigg after your coffee.’
   ‘You betcha,’ said the girl. 
   ‘Id very bad for you, you dow.’ 
   ‘Is it?’ 
   ‘Id id. Caffeide. Cholethderog in the milgg.’ 
   ‘I see, so it was just my health you were thinking of.’ 
   ‘I was thiggigg of meddy thiggs,’ said Dirk airily. 
   ‘You saw me sitting  at the next table  and  you  thought “There’s  a
nice-looking girl  with  her  health  in ruins.  Let  me save  her  from
herself.”’ 
   ‘In a nudthell.’ 
   ‘Do you know you’ve broken your nose?’ 
   ‘Yeth, of courth I do,’ said Dirk crossly. ‘Everybody keepth --’ 
   ‘How long ago did you break it?’ the girl asked. 
   ‘Id wad broked for me,’ said Dirk, ‘aboud tweddy middidd ago.’ 
   ‘I thought so,’ said the girl. ‘Close your eyes for a moment.’ 
   Dirk looked at her suspiciously. 
   ‘Why?’ 
   ‘It’s all right,’  she said with a smile, ‘I’m not going to hurt you.
Now close them.’ 
   With a puzzled  frown,  Dirk  closed his eyes just  for  a moment. In
that moment  the girl reached over  and gripped  him firmly by the nose,
giving it a sharp twist.  Dirk  nearly exploded with  pain and howled so
loudly that he almost attracted the attention of a waiter. 
   ‘You  widge!’  he  yelled,  staggering  wildly  back  from  the table
clutching his face. ‘You double-dabbed widge!’ 
   ‘Oh, be quiet and sit  down,’  she said. ‘All right, I lied  about it
not  going to  hurt you, but at least it should  be  straight now, which
will save  you a  lot worse later on. You should get straight round to a
hospital to have some  splints and padding put on.  I’m  a nurse, I know
what I’m doing. Or at least, I think I do. Let’s have a look at you.’ 
   Panting and  spluttering,  Dirk sat down once more, his  hands cupped
round  his nose. After a few  long seconds he began  to prod it tenderly
again and then let the girl examine it. 
   She  said,  ‘My name’s  Sally Mills, by  the way.  I  usually  try to
introduce  myself properly  before  physical intimacy  takes place,  but
sometimes,’ she sighed, ‘there just isn’t time.’ 
   Dirk ran his fingers up either side of his nose again. 
   ‘I thigg id id trader,’ Dirk said at last. 
   ‘Straighter,’ Sally  said. ‘Say “straighter” properly. It’ll help you
feel better.’
   ‘Straighter,’ said Dirk. ‘Yed. I thee wad you mead.’ 
   ‘What?’ 
   ‘I see what you mead.’ 
   ‘Good,’ she  said with a sigh of relief,  ‘I’m  glad  that worked. My
horoscope this morning said that virtually everything  I  decided  today
would be wrong.’ 
   ‘Yes,  well you  don’t want to  believe all  that rubbish,’ said Dirk
sharply. 
   ‘I don’t,’ said Satly.  
   ‘Particularly not The Great Zaganza.’ 
   ‘Oh, you read it too, did you?’ 
   ‘No. That is, well, not for the same reason.’ 
   ‘My reason  was that a patient asked me to read his horoscope  to him
this morning just before he died. What was yours?’ 
   ‘Er, a very complicated one.’ 
   ‘I see,’ said Sally, sceptically. ‘What’s this?’ 
   ‘It’s a  calculator,’  said Dirk. ‘Well, look, I mustn’t keep  you. I
am  indebted  to  you,  my  dear   lady,  for  the  tenderness  of  your
ministrations  and the loan  of your coffee, but lo!  the day  wears on,
and  I  am  sure you have a  heavy schedule of  grievous  bodily harm to
attend to.’ 
   ‘Not at all. I came off night duty at nine  o’clock this morning, and
all I have  to  do all  day is  keep awake so that  I can sleep normally
tonight.  I have nothing  better  to do  than to sit  around  talking to
strangers in  cafés. You,  on the other  hand, should  get yourself to a
casualty department  as  soon as  possible. As  soon as  you’ve paid  my
bill, in fact.’ 
   She leant  over  to the table she had originally been sitting at  and
picked  up  the  running-total  lying by her  plate. She looked  at  it,
shaking her head disapprovingly. 
   ‘Five  cups of coffee, I’m afraid. It was a long night  on the wards.
All sorts of comings and goings in  the middle  of it. One patient in  a
coma who had to be moved to  a private hospital in the  early hours. God
knows  why  it  had  to  be  done  at that time  of night.  Just creates
unnecessary trouble. I wouldn’t  pay for the second  croissant if I were
you. I ordered it but it never came.’ 
   She pushed the bill  across to Dirk who picked it up with a reluctant
sigh. 
   ‘Inordinate,’  he  said,   ‘larcenously   inordinate.  And,  in   the
circumstances, adding a  15 per  cent  service  charge is tantamount  to
jeering at you. I bet they won’t even bring me a knife.’ 
   He  turned and tried, without any real hope of success, to summon any
of the gaggle of waiters lounging among the sugar bowls at the back. 
   Sally Mills took her bill and Dirk’s and attempted to add them  up on
Dirk’s calculator. 
   ‘The total seems to come to “A Suffusion of Yellow”,’ she said. 
   ‘Thank  you,  I’ll take  that,’  said Dirk  turning bask crossly  and
relieving  her  of  the electronic  I Ching  set which  he put  into his
pocket. He resumed his hapless waving at the tableau of waiters. 
   ‘What do you want a knife for, anyway?’ asked Sally. 
   ‘To  open this,’  said  Dirk, waggling  the large, heavily Sellotaped
envelope at her. 
   ‘I’ll get  you one,’ she said. A young  man  sitting  on  his own  at
another nearby table was looking away at  that  moment, so Sally quickly
leaned across and nabbed his knife. 
   ‘I  am indebted to you,’ said  Dirk and put  out his hand to take the
knife from her. 
   She held it away from him. 
   ‘What’s in the envelope?’ she said. 
   ‘You  are  an extremely  inquisitive  and  presumptuous young  lady,’
exclaimed Dirk. 
   ‘And you,’ said Sally Mills, ‘are very strange.’ 
   ‘Only,’ said Dirk, ‘as strange as I need to be.’ 
   ‘Humph,’  said  Sally. ‘What’s in the envelope?’  She  still wouldn’t
give him the knife. 
   ‘The envelope is not yours,’ proclaimed Dirk, ‘and  its  contents are
not your concern.’ 
   ‘It looks very interesting though. What’s in it?’ 
   ‘Well, I won’t know till I’ve opened it!’ 
   She  looked at him suspiciously, then snatched the envelope from him.
   ‘I insist that you --’ expostulated Dirk, incompletely. 
   ‘What’s your name?’ demanded Sally. 
   ‘My name is Gently. Mr Dirk Gently.’ 
   ‘And not Geoffrey  Anstey, or any of these other names that have been
crossed out?’ She frowned, briefly, looking at them. 
   ‘No,’ said Dirk. ‘Certainly not.’ 
   ‘So you mean the envelope is not yours either?’ 
   ‘I -- that is --’ 
   ‘Aha! So you are also being extremely...what was it?’ 
   ‘Inquisitive  and presumptuous. I do not deny it. But I am  a private
detective.  I am  paid to be inquisitive  and presumptuous. Not as often
or copiously  as  I  would wish, but  I  am nevertheless inquisitive and
presumptuous on a professional basis.’ 
   ‘How  sad.   I  think  it’s  much  more  fun  being  inquisitive  and
presumptuous as a hobby. So  you are a professional while I am merely an
amateur of  Olympic standard. You don’t look like a private  detective.’
   ‘No private  detective looks like a private detective. That’s one  of
the first rules of private detection.’ 
   ‘But if  no private  detective  looks like a private  detective,  how
does a private  detective know what  it  is he’s  supposed  not to  look
like? Seems to me there’s a problem there.’ 
   ‘Yes,  but it’s  not one that keeps me awake at nights,’ said Dirk in
exasperation. ‘Anyway, I am not as other private detectives.  My methods
are holistic and,  in  a very  proper  sense  of  the  word,  chaotic. I
operate  by  investigating  the  fundamental  interconnectedness  of all
things.’ 
   Sally Mills merely blinked at him. 
   ‘Every  particle  in the  universe,’ continued  Dirk, warming  to his
subject  and  beginning to stare a bit,  ‘affects every other  particle,
however faintly or obliquely. Everything  interconnects with everything.
The beating of a butterfly’s wings in  China can affect the course of an
Atlantic hurricane.  If I could interrogate this table-leg in a way that
made  sense  to  me, or to the  table-leg, then it could provide me with
the answer  to any  question about the  universe. I  could ask anybody I
liked, chosen entirely by chance,  any random question  I cared to think
of,  and their  answer, or lack of  it, would in some  way bear upon the
problem to which I am seeking a solution.  It  is  only  a  question  of
knowing  how  to  interpret it. Even  you, whom  I have  met entirely by
chance,  probably  know things that  are vital to  my  investigation, if
only I  knew  what  to ask you, which I  don’t, and if  only I could  be
bothered to, which I can’t.’ 
   He  paused, and  said, ‘Please will you  let me have the envelope and
the knife?’ 
   ‘You make it sound as if someone’s life depends on it.’ 
   Dirk dropped his eyes for a moment. 
   ‘I rather think somebody’s life  did depend on it,’ he said. He  said
it in such a way that a cloud seemed to pass briefly over them.
   Sally Mills relented and  passed  the  envelope and the knife over to
Dirk. A spark seemed to go out of her. 
   The knife was too blunt and the Sellotape too  thickly  applied. Dirk
struggled with it for  a few seconds but was unable to slice through it.
He sat back in his seat feeling tired and irritable. 
   He said, ‘I’ll go and ask them if  they’ve got anything sharper,’ and
stood up, clutching the envelope. 
   ‘You should go and get your nose fixed,’ said Sally Mills quietly. 
   ‘Thank you,’ said Dirk and bowed very slightly to her. 
   He  picked  up  the  bills  and set  out to  visit  the exhibition of
waiters  mounted at the  rear  of  the cafe.  He  encountered a  certain
coolness when he was disinclined to  augment the  mandatory 15  per cent
service  charge with  any voluntary  additional  token  of  his personal
appreciation,  and was told that  no,  that  was the only  type of knife
they had and that’s all there was to it. 
   Dirk thanked them and walked back through the café. 
   Sitting in his  seat talking to  Sally Mills was the  young man whose
knife  she had purloined. He nodded to her, but she was deeply engrossed
in conversation with her new friend and did not notice. 
   ‘...in  a coma,’ she was saying, ‘who had to  be moved to  a  private
hospital  in the early hours. God knows  why it had to  be done at  that
time  of night.  Just creates  unnecessary  trouble. Excuse me rabbiting
on, but  the  patient had his own personal Coca-Cola machine and sledge-
hammer with  him, and that sort of  thing is  all very well in a private
hospital, but on a short-staffed  NHS ward it just makes me tired, and I
talk  too much when  I’m  tired. If I suddenly  fall insensible  to  the
floor, would you let me know?’ 
   Dirk  walked on, and then noticed  that Sally Mills had left the book
she  had been  reading on  her original table,  and something  about  it
caught his attention. 
   It was a large book,  called /Run Like the  Devil/.  In fact  it  was
extremely large and a little dog-eared, looking more  like a puff pastry
cliff  than  a book.  The bottom  half of the cover  featured the normal
woman-in-cocktail-dress-framed-in-the-sights-of-a-gun,   while  the  top
half  was entirely  taken  up  with  the  author’s  name,  Howard  Bell,
embossed in silver. 
   Dirk couldn’t immediately work  out  what  it was about the book that
had  caught  his  eye, but he  knew that  some detail  of the  cover had
struck a  chord with  him somewhere. He gave a circumspect glance at the
girl  whose coffee  he had  purloined, and  whose  five coffees  and two
croissants,  one undelivered and uneaten, he  had subsequently paid for.
She  wasn’t looking, so he  purloined her  book as  well  and slipped it
into the pocket of his leather coat. 
   He  stepped out on to the street, where  a passing  eagle swooped out
of the sky at  him, nearly forcing  him into  the path of a cyclist, who
cursed  and swore at  him from a moral high ground that  cyclists  alone
seem able to inhabit. 
   
   
[::: CHAPTER 11 :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::]
   
   Into  the well-kempt  grounds that  lay just  on the  outskirts  of a
well-kempt  village  on the fringes of the well-kempt Cotswolds turned a
less than well-kempt car. 
   It was a battered  yellow Citroën 2CV which had had one careful owner
but  also three  suicidally  reckless  ones.  It  made its  way  up  the
driveway with a  reluctant air  as if all it asked for  from life was to
be  tipped  into  a restful ditch  in one  of the  adjoining meadows and
there  allowed to settle in  graceful abandonment, instead of which here
it  was  being asked to drag itself all the  way up this long  gravelled
drive  which it would no doubt soon  be called  upon to drag itself  all
the  way back down again, to what possible purpose it was beyond its wit
to imagine. 
   It drew to a  halt in front of the elegant stone entrance to the main
building, and then began  to  trundle slowly  backwards again  until its
occupant yanked on the handbrake,  which  evoked from the  car a sort of
strangled ‘eek’. 
   A door flopped open, wobbling perilously on  its one remaining hinge,
and there  emerged  from  the  car  a pair of  the  sort  of legs  which
soundtrack editors are unable  to  see  without needing  to slap a smoky
saxophone solo  all over, for reasons which  no one  besides  soundtrack
editors has  ever  been able  to understand. In  this  particular  case,
however, the saxophone would have been silenced by the proximity of  the
kazoo which the  same  soundtrack  editor  would  almost certainly  have
slapped all over the progress of the vehicle. 
   The owner of  the legs followed them in the usual  manner, closed the
car door tenderly, and then made her way into the building. 
   The car remained parked in front of it. 
   After a few minutes  a porter  came out and  examined it,  adopted  a
disapproving manner and then, for lack of anything  more positive to do,
went back in. 
   A  short time  later,  Kate  was  shown into  the office of  Mr Ralph
Standish, the Chief  Consultant Psychologist and one of the directors of
the   Woodshead   Hospital,   who   was   just  completing  a  telephone
conversation. 
   ‘Yes,  it  is  true,’  he   was  saying,  ‘that  sometimes  unusually
intelligent and sensitive  children can appear  to be  stupid.  But, Mrs
Benson, stupid children  can sometimes appear  to be stupid as  well.  I
think that’s something  you  might have  to consider.  I  know it’s very
painful, yes. Good day, Mrs Benson.’ 
   He  put the phone  away  into  a desk  drawer and  spent a  couple of
seconds collecting his thoughts before looking up. 
   ‘This is  very short notice, Miss, er, Schechter,’  he said to her at
last. 
   In fact what he had said was, ‘This is very  short notice, Miss, er -
-’  and then he had  paused and peered  into another of his desk drawers
before saying ‘Schechter’. 
   It  seemed to  Kate that it was very odd to keep your visitors’ names
in a  drawer,  but then he clearly disliked having things  cluttering up
his fine,  but  severely  designed,  black  ash desk because  there  was
nothing  on  it  at  all.  It was  completely blank, as was  every other
surface  in  his  office. There was nothing on  the small neat steel and
glass coffee  table which  sat  squarely between two  Barcelona  chairs.
There  was nothing on  top of the  two expensive-looking filing cabinets
which stood at the back of the room. 
   There  were no  bookshelves  --  if  there were any books  they  were
presumably hidden away behind the white doors of the  large blank built-
in  cupboards  -- and  although there  was one plain black picture frame
hanging on the wall, this was presumably a temporary aberration  because
there was no picture in it. 
   Kate looked around her with a bemused air. 
   ‘Do you have no ornaments in here at all, Mr Standish?’ she asked. 
   He  was,  for  a moment, somewhat taken  aback by  her  transatlantic
directness, but then answered her. 
   ‘Indeed I  have ornaments,’ he said, and pulled open another  drawer.
He pulled out from  this a small china  model of a kitten playing with a
ball of wool and put it firmly on the desk in front of him. 
   ‘As  a  psychologist  I  am   aware   of   the  important  role  that
ornamentation plays in nourishing the human spirit,’ he pronounced. 
   He put the china kitten back in the  drawer and slid it closed with a
smooth click. 
   ‘Now.’ 
   He  clasped his hands  together  on the  desk  in  front  of him, and
looked at her enquiringly. 
   ‘It’s very good of you to see me at short notice, Mr Standish --’ 
   ‘Yes, yes, we’ve established that.’ 
   ‘-- but I’m sure you know what newspaper deadlines are like.’ 
   ‘I  know at  least  as  much  as  I would  ever care  to  know  about
newspapers, Miss, er --’ 
   He opened his drawer again. 
   ‘Miss Schechter, but --’ 
   ‘Well   that’s   partly   what  made  me  approach  you,’  lied  Kate
charmingly. ‘I know that you have suffered from some, well,  unfortunate
publicity here,  and  thought you  might welcome the opportunity to talk
about some  of  the  more  enlightening  aspects  of  the  work  at  the
Woodshead Hospital.’ She smiled very sweetly. 
   ‘It’s only  because you come  to  me with  the highest recommendation
from my very good friend and colleague Mr, er --’ 
   ‘Franklin, Alan  Franklin,’ prompted  Kate,  to save the psychologist
from having  to  open  his drawer again.  Alan Franklin  was a therapist
whom Kate  had seen  for a few  sessions after  the  loss of her husband
Luke.  He had  warned  her  that Standish,  though  brilliant,  was also
peculiar, even by the high standards set by his profession. 
   ‘Franklin,’ resumed Standish, ‘that I agreed to see you. Let  me warn
you instantly that  if I  see any resumption of this “Something nasty in
the  Woodshead” mendacity  appearing in  the  papers as a result of this
interview I will, I will --’ 
   ‘“ -- do such things --
    “What they are yet I know not -- but they shall be 
    “The terror of the Earth”,’ said Kate, brightly. 
   Standish narrowed his eyes. 
   ‘/Lear/,  Act 2, Scene  4,’ he  said.  ‘And I think you’ll find  it’s
“terrors” and not “terror”.’ 
   ‘Do you know, I think you’re right?’ replied Kate. 
   Thank you,  Alan, she  thought.  She smiled at  Standish, who relaxed
into pleased superiority. It  was  odd, Kate reflected,  that people who
needed to bully you were the easiest to push around. 
   ‘So you would like to know precisely what, Miss Schechter?’ 
   ‘Assume,’ said Kate, ‘that I know nothing.’ 
   Standish smiled, as if  to signify that no  assumption could possibly
give him greater pleasure. 
   ‘Very well,’ he  said.  ‘The  Woodshead  is a research  hospital.  We
specialise in the care and study of patients with unusual or  previously
unknown  conditions, largely in the psychological or psychiatric fields.
Funds  are raised in various ways.  One  of  our chief methods is  quite
simply  to  take in  private patients at  exorbitantly high  fees, which
they are  happy to pay, or at least happy to complain about. There is in
fact  nothing  to  complain  about  because  patients  who  come  to  us
privately are made  fully  aware of why our  fees are so high.  For  the
money  they  are  paying,  they  are, of course,  perfectly  entitled to
complain -- the right  to  complain is  one of  the privileges  they are
paying for. In some  cases we come to a special arrangement under which,
in return  for being made the sole beneficiaries of  a patient’s estate,
we will guarantee to look after that patient for  the rest of his or her
life.’ 
   ‘So in  effect  you  are in  the  business of giving scholarships  to
people with particularly gifted diseases?’ 
   ‘Exactly. A  very  good way of expressing  it. We are in the business
of giving  scholarships  to people with particularly gifted diseases.  I
must make a note of that. Miss Mayhew!’ 
   He had opened a  drawer, which clearly contained his office intercom.
In response  to his summons one  of the cupboards opened, and turned out
to be a door into a side  office -- a  feature which  must have appealed
to  some architect  who had  conceived an ideological dislike of  doors.
From this office there  emerged obediently a thin and rather blank-faced
woman in her mid-forties. 
   ‘Miss Mayhew,’ said Mr Standish,  ‘we are in  the  business of giving
scholarships to people with particularly gifted diseases.’ 
   ‘Very  good, Mr Standish,’ said Miss Mayhew, and retreated  backwards
into her office, pulling the door closed after her.  Kate wondered if it
was perhaps a cupboard after all. 
   ‘And  we do  have some  patients with some  really quite  outstanding
diseases at the moment,’ enthused the  psychologist.  ‘Perhaps you would
care to come and see one or two of our current stars?’ 
   ‘Indeed I would. That would be most  interesting, Mr Standish, you’re
very kind,’ said Kate. 
   ‘You have to be kind in  this job,’  Standish  replied, and flicked a
smile on and off at her. 
   Kate  was trying  to keep some of the impatience she  was feeling out
of her manner. She did not  take  to Mr  Standish, and was  beginning to
feel  that  there was a kind of Martian quality to him. Furthermore, the
only thing  she  was actually  interested in was discovering  whether or
not the hospital had accepted a new admission  in the early hours of the
morning, and if so, where he was and whether she could see him. 
   She  had originally  tried the direct approach but had  been rebuffed
by a  mere telephone receptionist on the grounds that  she didn’t have a
name to ask for. Simply  asking if they had any tall,  well-built, blond
men in residence had seemed to create entirely  the wrong impression. At
least,  she  insisted  to   herself  that  it  was  entirely  the  wrong
impression. A quick phone call to Alan Franklin had set her up for  this
altogether more subtle approach. 
   ‘Good!’ A look of doubt passed momentarily over  Mr  Standish’s face,
and he summoned Miss Mayhew from out of her cupboard again. 
   ‘Miss Mayhew, that last thing I just said to you --’ 
   ‘Yes, Mr Standish?’ 
   ‘I assume you  realised  that I wished you  to make a note of it  for
me?’ 
   ‘No, Mr Standish, but I will be happy to do so.’ 
   ‘Thank you,’ said  Mr Standish  with a slightly tense look. ‘And tidy
up in here please. The place looks a --’ 
   He  wanted to say that the place looked a mess, but was frustrated by
its air of clinical sterility. 
   ‘Just tidy up generally,’ he concluded. 
   ‘Yes, Mr Standish.’ 
   The  psychologist  nodded  tersely, brushed a non-existent  speck  of
dust off the top of his desk, flicked another brief smile on  and off at
Kate and then escorted  her out  of  his office into the corridor  which
was immaculately laid with  the sort of beige carpet which gave everyone
who walked on it electric shocks. 
   ‘Here, you see,’  said  Standish,  indicating part  of the  wall they
were walking past  with an  idle wave of his hand, but  not making it in
any way clear what it was he wished her  to see or what she was supposed
to understand from it. 
   ‘And this,’ he said, apparently pointing at a door hinge. 
   ‘Ah,’ he  added,  as  the door  swung  open  towards  them. Kate  was
alarmed to find herself  giving a  little expectant  start every time  a
door opened  anywhere in this place. This was not the sort of  behaviour
she  expected of  a  worldly-wise  New  Yorker  journalist, even  if she
didn’t actually live  in New York  and  only wrote  travel articles  for
magazines. It still was not right for her to be  looking for large blond
men every time a door opened. 
   There was no large  blond man.  There was  instead  a  small,  sandy-
haired girl of about ten years old, being  pushed along in a wheelchair.
She seemed very pale,  sick and  withdrawn, and was murmuring  something
soundlessly  to herself. Whatever  it  was  she was  murmuring seemed to
cause her worry and agitation, and she would  flop this way then that in
her  chair  as if  trying  to escape  from the words coming out  of  her
mouth.  Kate was instantly moved by the  sight of her, and on an impulse
asked the nurse who was pushing her along to stop. 
   She squatted  down to look kindly into  the girl’s face, which seemed
to please the nurse a little, but Mr Standish less so. 
   Kate did not try to demand the  girl’s attention, merely gave  her an
open and  friendly  smile to see if she  wanted to respond, but the girl
seemed  unwilling  or  unable  to.  Her  mouth  worked  away  endlessly,
appearing almost to lead an  existence that was independent  of the rest
of her face. 
   Now that  Kate looked at her more closely  it  seemed that she looked
not  so much sick and withdrawn  as weary,  harassed and unutterably fed
up.  She needed a  little  rest, she  needed peace, but  her  mouth kept
motoring on. 
   For  a fleeting instant her eyes  caught Kate’s, and the message Kate
received was along the lines  of  ‘I’m  sorry but you’ll  just  have  to
excuse me while all this  is going on’.  The  girl  took a  deep breath,
half-closed  her eyes in resignation and continued her relentless silent
murmuring. 
   Kate leant forward a little in an  attempt to catch any actual words,
but she couldn’t  make anything  out. She shot an enquiring  look  up at
Standish. 
   He said, simply, ‘Stock market prices.’ 
   A look of amazement crept over Kate’s face. 
   Standish added with a wry shrug, ‘Yesterday’s, I’m afraid.’ 
   Kate  flinched at having  her reaction  so wildly misinterpreted, and
hurriedly looked back at the girl in order to cover her confusion. 
   ‘You mean,’ she  said, rather redundantly,  ‘she’s  just sitting here
reciting  yesterday’s stock market  prices?’ The  girl  rolled  her eyes
past Kate’s. 
   ‘Yes,’ said Standish.  ‘It  took  a lip  reader  to work out what was
going  on. We  all  got  rather  excited,  of  course,  but then  closer
examination revealed that they were only yesterday’s which  was a bit of
a  disappointment.   Not  that  significant   a  case  really.  Aberrant
behaviour. Interesting to know why she does it, but --’ 
   ‘Hold  on  a moment,’  said Kate,  trying  to  sound  very interested
rather than absolutely horrified,  ‘are you saying that she is  reciting
-- what? -- the closing prices over and over, or --’ 
   ‘No. That’s  an interesting feature of course. She pretty much  keeps
pace with movements in the market over the course  of a whole  day. Just
twenty-four hours out of step.’ 
   ‘But that’s extraordinary, isn’t it?’ 
   ‘Oh yes. Quite a feat.’ 
   ‘A /feat/?’ 
   ‘Well,  as  a scientist, I  have to take  the  view  that  since  the
information  is freely  available,  she  is acquiring it  through normal
channels. There’s  no necessity in  this case to invent any supernatural
or  paranormal dimension.  Occam’s razor.  Shouldn’t needlessly multiply
entities.’ 
   ‘But has anyone  seen her studying  the newspapers, or copying  stuff
down over the phone?’ 
   She looked up at the nurse, who shook her head, dumbly. 
   ‘No,  never actually  caught  her at it,’ said Standish. ‘As I  said,
it’s quite  a feat. I’m sure  a  stage magician or memory man could tell
you how it was done.’ 
   ‘Have you asked one?’ 
   ‘No. Don’t hold with such people.’ 
   ‘But  do  you  really think that she  could  possibly  be doing  this
deliberately?’ insisted Kate. 
   ‘Believe me,  if you  understood as much about  people as I do, Miss,
er  --  you  would  believe  anything,’  said  Standish,  in   his  most
professionally reassuring tone of voice. 
   Kate stared into the tired, wretched face of the young girl and  said
nothing. 
   ‘You  have  to  understand,’ said  Standish,  ‘that  we  have  to  be
rational about this.  If it was tomorrow’s stock market prices, it would
be  a  different  story.  That would  be a  phenomenon  of  an  entirely
different  character  which would merit  and demand  the  most  rigorous
study. And I’m  sure we’d have no  difficulty  in funding the  research.
There would be absolutely no problem about that.’ 
   ‘I see,’ said Kate, and meant it. 
   She stood up, a little stiffly, and brushed down her skirt. 
   ‘So,’ she  said, and  felt  ashamed  of herself, ‘who  is your newest
patient? Who has  arrived  most recently, then?’  She  shuddered at  the
crassness  of  the /non sequitur/, but  reminded  herself  that she  was
there as a journalist, so it would not seem odd. 
   Standish waved the  nurse and the wheelchair  with  its sad charge on
their  way.  Kate  glanced  back  at  the  girl once, and then  followed
Standish through the swing-doors and into the  next section of corridor,
which was identical to the previous one. 
   ‘Here,  you  see,’  said  Standish  again,  this  time  apparently in
relation to a window frame. 
   ‘And this,’ he said, pointing at a light. 
   He had obviously either not heard  her  question  or was deliberately
ignoring it. Perhaps, thought Kate,  he was simply treating it with  the
contempt it deserved. 
   It  suddenly dawned on  her  what all this /Here  you  see/, and /And
this/ing  was  about. He  was asking her to  admire  the  quality of the
decor.  The  windows  were  sashes,  with  finely made  and  beautifully
painted  beads; the light fittings were of  a heavy dull metal, probably
nickel-plated -- and so on. 
   ‘Very  fine,’ she  said accommodatingly, and then  noticed  that this
had sounded an odd thing to say in her American accent. 
   ‘Nice  place you’ve got here,’  she added,  thinking that that  would
please him. 
   It did. He allowed himself a subdued beam of pleasure. 
   ‘We like to think of it as a quality caring environment,’ he said. 
   ‘You must  get a lot of people wanting to come here,’ Kate continued,
plugging  away  at her theme. ‘How often do you admit new patients? When
was the last --?’ 
   With her  left hand she carefully restrained  her  right  hand  which
wanted to strangle her at this moment. 
   A  door  they   were  passing  was  slightly  ajar,  and  she  tried,
unobtrusively, to look in. 
   ‘Very well, we’ll  take  a look in here,’ said  Standish immediately,
pushing the door fully open,  on  what transpired  to  be quite a  small
room. 
   ‘Ah yes,’ Standish  said, recognising  the  occupant. He ushered Kate
in. 
   The  occupant of the  room was  another  non-large, non-blond person.
Kate  was  beginning  to  find  the whole visit  to  be something of  an
emotionally wearing experience, and  she had a feeling that things  were
not about to ease up in that respect. 
   The man sitting in the bedside chair while his bed was being  made up
by a  hospital  orderly  was  one of  the most  deeply and  disturbingly
tousled people  that  Kate had ever seen. In  fact it  was only his hair
that  was tousled, but  it was tousled to such an extreme degree that it
seemed to draw all of his long face up into its distressed chaos. 
   He seemed quite content to sit  where he was, but there was something
tremendously vacant about  his  contentedness --  he seemed literally to
be content about nothing. There was  a completely empty space hanging in
the  air  about  eighteen  inches  in   front  of  his  face,  and   his
contentedness,  if it sprang from anything, sprang from staring at that.
   There was also  a sense that he was waiting for something. Whether it
was something that was about  to happen at any moment, or something that
was going to  happen later in the week, or even something that was going
to happen some little while  after  hell iced over  and British  Telecom
got the phones  fixed was by no  means apparent because it seemed to  be
all  the  same to him. If it  happened  he was ready  for it  and  if it
didn’t -- he was content. 
   Kate found such contentedness almost unbearably distressing. 
   ‘What’s  the matter with him?’ she said quietly, and  then  instantly
realised  that  she  was  talking as if he wasn’t  there  when  he could
probably  speak perfectly  well for himself. Indeed, at that moment,  he
suddenly did speak. 
   ‘Oh, er, hi,’ he said. ‘OK, yeah, thank you.’ 
   ‘Er, hello,’ she said, in  response, though  it didn’t seem  quite to
fit.  Or  rather,  what he  had said didn’t seem quite to fit.  Standish
made a gesture to her to discourage her from speaking. 
   ‘Er, yeah,  a bagel would be fine,’ said the contented man.  He  said
it in a flat kind of  tone, as if merely repeating something he had been
given to say. 
   ‘Yeah,  and  maybe  some  juice,’  he  added. ‘OK,  thanks.’ He  then
relaxed into his state of empty watchfulness. 
   ‘A very unusual  condition,’ said Standish, ‘that is to say,  we  can
only  believe that it  is entirely unique. I’ve certainly never heard of
anything  remotely like it. It  has also proved  virtually impossible to
verify beyond question that it is what it appears to be, so I’m glad  to
say  that we have been spared  the  embarrassment of  attempting to give
the condition a name.’ 
   ‘Would  you  like me to help Mr Elwes back to bed?’ asked the orderly
of  Standish.  Standish  nodded.  He  didn’t  bother  to waste  words on
minions. 
   The orderly bent down to talk to the patient. 
   ‘Mr Elwes?’ he said quietly. 
   Mr Elwes seemed to swim up out of a reverie. 
   ‘Mmmm?’ he said, and suddenly looked around. He seemed confused. 
   ‘Oh! Oh? What?’ he said faintly. 
   ‘Would you like me to help you back to bed?’ 
   ‘Oh. Oh, thank you, yes. Yes, that would be kind.’ 
   Though  clearly  dazed and bewildered, Mr Elwes was quite able to get
himself  back  into  bed, and  all  the  orderly  needed  to supply  was
reassurance  and encouragement.  Once  Mr  Elwes was well  settled,  the
orderly nodded politely to Standish and Kate and made his exit. 
   Mr  Elwes  quickly  lapsed  back  into  his trancelike  state,  lying
propped  up against an  escarpment  of pillows. His head dropped forward
slightly and he  stared at one of his knees, poking up bonily from under
the covers. 
   ‘Get me New York,’ he said. 
   Kate shot a  puzzled glance  at  Standish,  hoping  for  some kind of
explanation, but got none. 
   ‘Oh,  OK,’ said  Mr Elwes, ‘it’s 541  something.  Hold on.’  He spoke
another four digits of a number in his dead, flat voice. 
   ‘What is happening here?’ asked Kate at last. 
   ‘It took us rather  a long time  to work it out. It was only quite by
the remotest chance  that someone discovered it. That  television was on
in the room...’
   He pointed to the small portable set off to one side of the bed. 
   ‘...tuned  to one  of those  chat programme things, which happened to
be going out  live. Most extraordinary  thing. Mr Elwes was sitting here
muttering  about how much he  hated the BBC  -- don’t know if it was the
BBC, perhaps it  was one of those  other channels they have  now  -- and
was  expressing  an  opinion about  the  host  of  the programme, to the
effect that he considered him to be  a  rectum  of some kind, and saying
furthermore that he wished the whole  thing was over  and that, yes, all
right he was coming, and  then suddenly what  he was saying and what was
on  the   television   began   in  some  extraordinary   way  almost  to
synchronise.’ 
   ‘I don’t understand what you mean,’ said Kate. 
   ‘I’d be surprised  if you did,’ said Standish. ‘Everything that Elwes
said  was then said just a moment later on the television by a gentleman
by the name of  Mr  Dustin  Hoffman.  It seems that Mr Elwes here  knows
everything  that this Mr Hoffman is  going  to  say just a second or  so
before he  says it. It  is not, I have to say, something that Mr Hoffman
would  be  very  pleased about  if  he knew.  Attempts have been made to
alert  the gentleman to the problem,  but  he has  proved to be somewhat
difficult to reach.’ 
   ‘Just what the shit is going on here?’ asked Mr Elwes placidly. 
   ‘Mr Hoffman  is,  we  believe, currently  making a  film  on location
somewhere on the west coast of America.’ 
   He looked at his watch. 
   ‘I  think he  has probably  just woken up in  his hotel and is making
his early morning phone calls,’ he added. 
   Kate  was   gazing  with  astonishment   between  Standish   and  the
extraordinary Mr Elwes. 
   ‘How long has the poor man been like this?’ 
   ‘Oh, about five years  I  think.  Started absolutely out of the blue.
He was sitting having  dinner  with  his  family one day  as usual  when
suddenly he  started  complaining  about his caravan.  And then  shortly
afterwards about how he was being  shot. He then  spent the entire night
talking in his sleep, repeating  the same apparently meaningless phrases
over  and  over  again and also saying that he didn’t think much of  the
way they were written. It was a very trying time for his family,  as you
can  imagine,  living  with  such  a perfectionist  actor  and  not even
realising it. It  now seems  very surprising how  long  it  took them to
identify what was occurring. Particularly when he  once woke them all up
in the early  hours of the morning to thank them  and  the  producer and
the director for his Oscar.’ 
   Kate, who didn’t realise that the day was  still  only  softening her
up for what was to come,  made the mistake of thinking that  it had just
reached a climax of shock. 
   ‘The  poor man,’ she  said  in a hushed voice. ‘What a pathetic state
to be in. He’s just living as someone else’s shadow.’ 
   ‘I don’t think he’s in any pain.’ 
   Mr Elwes  appeared to be  quietly locked in a  bitter  argument which
seemed to  touch  on  the  definitions  of the words  ‘points’, ‘gross’,
‘profits’ and ‘limo’. 
   ‘But the  implications of this are /extraordinary/ aren’t they?’ said
Kate.  ‘He’s  actually  saying  these  things  moments  /before/  Dustin
Hoffman?’ 
   ‘Well, it’s all conjecture  of  course.  We’ve only  got a few  clear
instances  of  absolute  correlation  and  we  just   haven’t   got  the
opportunity to  do  more  thorough research. One  has to recognise  that
those   few  instances  of  direct  correlation   were  not   rigorously
documented and could more simply be  explained as coincidence. The  rest
could be merely the product of an elaborate fantasy.’ 
   ‘But if you put this case next to that of the girl we just saw...’ 
   ‘Ah,  well  we can’t  do that you see. We have to judge each  case on
its own merits.’ 
   ‘But they’re both in the same world...’ 
   ‘Yes,  but  there are separate  issues. Obviously, if  Mr  Elwes here
could demonstrate  significant precognition of, for instance,  the  head
of  the  Soviet Union or, better still,  the  President  of  the  United
States, then clearly  there would be  important defence issues  involved
and  one might be prepared to stretch a point on the question of what is
and what is not  coincidence and fantasy, but for a mere screen actor --
that is,  a screen actor with no apparent designs on political office --
I  think  that,  no,  we have  to stick to  the  principles  of rigorous
science. 
   ‘So,’  he  added,  turning  to leave, and drawing Kate  with  him, ‘I
think that in  the  cases  of both Mr Elwes and, er,  what-was-her-name,
the charming girl in the wheelchair, it may be that  we are not able  to
be of much more help  to  them, and we may need the space and facilities
for more deserving cases.’ 
   Kate could think  of nothing to say  to  this and  followed, seething
dumbly. 
   ‘Ah,  now  here  we  have  an altogether  much more  interesting  and
promising case,’ said Standish,  forging  on ahead through  the next set
of double doors. 
   Kate  was  trying   to  keep   her  reactions   under  control,   but
nevertheless  even someone as  glassy and  Martian as Mr  Standish could
not  help  but  detect  that his audience was not absolutely with him. A
little extra brusqueness and  impatience  crept  into  his demeanour, to
join  forces with  the  large quantities of brusqueness  and  impatience
which were already there. 
   They paced down  the corridor for a few seconds  in silence. Kate was
looking for other  ways  of  casually introducing  the subject of recent
admissions,  but  was forced to  concede  to  herself  that  you  cannot
attempt  to  introduce  the  same subject  three times  in a row without
beginning  to lose  that  vital quality  of  casualness. She glanced  as
surreptitiously as she  could at each  door they  passed,  but most were
firmly closed, and the ones that were not  revealed nothing of interest.
   She glanced out of a window as they walked past it  and noticed a van
turning into a rear  courtyard.  It  caught her  attention in  the brief
instant  that it was  within her  view because it very clearly  wasn’t a
baker’s van or a laundry  van. Baker’s  vans and  laundry vans advertise
their business  and  have words  like ‘Bakery’ and ‘Laundry’  painted on
them, whereas this  van was completely blank. It  had absolutely nothing
to say to anyone and it said it loudly and distinctly. 
   It  was a large, heavy,  serious-looking van  that was  almost on the
verge of being an  actual lorry,  and it was painted in  a  uniform dark
metallic grey. It reminded  Kate  of  the  huge  gun-metal-grey  freight
lorries which thunder through Bulgaria and  Yugoslavia on their way from
Albania with nothing  but the  word ‘Albania’ stencilled on their sides.
She  remembered  wondering what it  was that  the Albanians  exported in
such an  anonymous way, but  when  on one occasion she had looked it up,
she  found that  their  only  export was electricity  --  which,  if she
remembered her high school physics correctly, was  unlikely  to be moved
around in lorries. 
   The  large, serious-looking van turned and started to reverse towards
a  rear entrance to the hospital. Whatever it  was that the  van usually
carried, Kate thought,  it was about either to pick it up or deliver it.
She moved on. 
   A few moments later  Standish arrived at a door, knocked at it gently
and looked  enquiringly  into the  room within. He then beckoned to Kate
to follow him in. 
   This was  a room of  an altogether different sort. Immediately within
the  door  was an ante-room with a very  large window through which  the
main room could be seen. The  two rooms were clearly  sound-proofed from
each  other,  because  the  ante-room  was decked  out  with  monitoring
equipment and computers,  not  one of  which but didn’t  hum  loudly  to
itself, and the main room contained a woman lying in bed, asleep. 
   ‘Mrs  Elspeth  May,’  said  Standish,  and clearly  felt  that he was
introducing the top of the bill. Her room was obviously  a very good one
--  spacious  and  furnished  comfortably and expensively. Fresh flowers
stood on  every surface, and  the  bedside  table  on  which  Mrs  May’s
knitting lay was of mahogany. 
   She  herself  was a comfortably  shaped, silver-haired lady  of  late
middle age, and she was lying asleep half propped  up in bed  on  a pile
of pillows, wearing a pink  woolly  cardigan. After a  moment it  became
clear to Kate  that though she was asleep  she was by no means inactive.
Her head lay back peacefully with her eyes closed, but  her  right  hand
was  clutching a pen which was scribbling away furiously on  a large pad
of  paper which lay beside  her. The hand,  like the  wheelchair  girl’s
mouth, seemed  to lead  an  independent  and feverishly  busy existence.
Some small pinkish  electrodes  were  taped  to  Mrs May’s forehead just
below her hairline, and Kate  assumed that these were providing some  of
the readings  which danced across the computer screens  in the ante-room
in which she and  Standish stood. Two white-coated  men  and a woman sat
monitoring  the  equipment,  and  a nurse  stood  watching  through  the
window. Standish  exchanged a  couple  of brief words  with  them on the
current  state  of the  patient,  which  was  universally agreed  to  be
excellent. 
   Kate  could not  escape the impression that she ought to know who Mrs
May was, but she didn’t and was forced to ask. 
   ‘She is a medium,’ said Standish a little crossly, ‘as  I assumed you
would  know. A medium of prodigious powers. She is currently in a trance
and engaged in  automatic writing.  She is  taking  dictation. Virtually
every piece of  dictation she receives is of inestimable value. You have
not heard of her?’ 
   Kate admitted that she had not. 
   ‘Well,  you  are no doubt  familiar with the lady  who  claimed  that
Mozart, Beethoven and Schubert were dictating music to her?’ 
   ‘Yes,  I did hear  about  that. There was  a lot  of stuff  in colour
supplements about her a few years ago.’ 
   ‘Her claims  were,  well, interesting,  if that’s the sort  of  thing
you’re interested in.  The music was certainly more consistent with what
might  be  produced  by  each  of  those  gentlemen quickly  and  before
breakfast, than  it  was  with what  you would  expect from  a musically
unskilled middle-aged housewife.’ 
   Kate could not let this pomposity pass. 
   ‘That’s a rather sexist  viewpoint,’  she  said, ‘George Eliot  was a
middle-aged housewife.’ 
   ‘Yes, yes,’  said Standish testily,  ‘but  she  wasn’t taking musical
dictation from the  deceased  Wolfgang  Amadeus.  That’s  the point  I’m
making.  Please try and follow  the logic of  this  argument  and do not
introduce irrelevancies.  If  I felt for a moment  that  the  example of
George  Eliot  could shed  any light on  our  present problem, you could
rely on me to introduce it myself. 
   ‘Where was I?’ 
   ‘I don’t know.’ 
   ‘Mabel.  Doris?  Was that her name? Let us call her Mabel. The  point
is  that the easiest way of dealing with the Doris problem was simply to
ignore it. Nothing very important hinged on it at all.  A few  concerts.
Second rate material. But here, here we  have something of an altogether
different nature.’ 
   He  said this last in hushed  tones and turned to study a  TV monitor
which stood among the bank of  computer screens. It showed a close-up of
Mrs  May’s hand  scuttling across  her  pad of  paper. Her  hand largely
obscured  what she  had  written,  but it  appeared to be mathematics of
some kind. 
   ‘Mrs May is, or  so she  claims, taking dictation  from  some  of the
greatest  physicists.  From Einstein and from Heisenberg and Planck. And
it  is  very hard to dispute  her claims,  because the information being
produced here,  by  automatic  writing,  by this...untutored lady, is in
fact physics of a very profound order. 
   ‘From the late Einstein  we are getting more and  more refinements to
our picture  of how time and space work at a macroscopic level, and from
the  late Heisenberg  and Planck  we are increasing our understanding of
the fundamental structures  of matter at a  quantum  level. And there is
absolutely no  doubt  that  this information  is  edging  us closer  and
closer towards  the elusive goal  of  a Grand Unified  Field  Theory  of
Everything. 
   ‘Now  this  produces  a  very  interesting,   not   to  say  somewhat
embarrassing  situation for  scientists  because the  means by which the
information  is  reaching us  seems to  be completely  contrary  to  the
meaning of the information.’ 
   ‘It’s like Uncle Henry,’ said Kate, suddenly. 
   Standish looked at her blankly. 
   ‘Uncle Henry thinks he’s a chicken,’ Kate explained. 
   Standish looked at her blankly again. 
   ‘You must have  heard it,’ said Kate. ‘“We’re  terribly worried about
Uncle Henry.  He  thinks he’s a chicken.” “Well, why  don’t you send him
to the doctor?” “Well, we would only we need the eggs.”’ 
   Standish  stared at her as if a small but perfectly formed elderberry
tree had suddenly sprung unbidden from the bridge of her nose. 
   ‘Say that again,’ he said in a small, shocked voice. 
   ‘What, all of it?’ 
   ‘All of it.’ 
   Kate stuck  her  fist on her hip  and said it again, doing the voices
with a bit more dash and Southern accents this time. 
   ‘That’s brilliant,’ Standish breathed when she had done. 
   ‘You  must  have heard it before,’  she said,  a  little surprised by
this response. ‘It’s an old joke.’ 
   ‘No,’ he said,  ‘I have not. We need the eggs. We need the /eggs/. We
/need/ the  eggs. “We can’t send him to the doctor because /we need  the
eggs/.” An astounding  insight into  the  central paradoxes of the human
condition and  of our indefatigable  facility for  constructing adaptive
rationales to account for it. Good God.’ 
   Kate shrugged. 
   ‘And you say this is a joke?’ demanded Standish incredulously. 
   ‘Yes. It’s very old, really.’ 
   ‘And are they all like that? I never realised.’ 
   ‘Well --’ 
   ‘I’m  astounded,’  said  Standish, ‘utterly astounded. I thought that
jokes  were  things  that fat  people  said  on  television  and I never
listened  to them. I  feel that people have been keeping  something from
me. Nurse!’ 
   The nurse who  had been keeping watch on  Mts May through  the window
jumped at being barked at unexpectedly like this. 
   ‘Er, yes, Mr Standish?’ she said. He clearly made her nervous. 
   ‘Why have you never told me any jokes?’ 
   The  nurse  stared at him,  and quivered at the impossibility of even
knowing how to think about answering such a question. 
   ‘Er, well...’ 
   ‘Make a note of  it will you? In future I  will  require  you and all
the other  staff in  this  hospital to tell me all the jokes you have at
your disposal, is that understood?’ 
   ‘Er, yes, Mr Standish --’ 
   Standish looked at her with doubt and suspicion. 
   ‘You do know some jokes do you, nurse?’ he challenged her. 
   ‘Er, yes, Mr Standish, I think, yes I do.’ 
   ‘Tell me one.’ 
   ‘What, er, now, Mr Standish?’ 
   ‘This instant.’ 
   ‘Er,  well, um  -- there’s one which is that a patient wakes up after
having,  well, that is, he’s  been to, er, to surgery, and  he wakes  up
and, it’s not very good, but  anyway,  he’s been to surgery and he  says
to the doctor when he wakes up, “Doctor,  doctor,  what’s wrong with me,
I can’t feel my  legs.”  And the doctor says, “Yes, I’m afraid we’ve had
to  amputate both your arms.” And that’s it really.  Er, that’s  why  he
couldn’t feel his legs, you see.’ 
   Mr Standish looked at her levelly for a moment or two. 
   ‘You’re on report, nurse,’ he said. 
   ‘Yes, Mr Standish.’ 
   He turned to Kate. 
   ‘Isn’t there  one  about  a  chicken  crossing a  road or  some  such
thing?’ 
   ‘Er, yes,’ said Kate, doubtfully. She felt she  was caught in  a  bit
of a situation here. 
   ‘And how does that go?’ 
   ‘Well,’ said Kate, ‘it goes “Why did the chicken cross the road?”’ 
   ‘Yes? And?’ 
   ‘And the answer is “To get to the other side”.’ 
   ‘I see.’  Standish  considered things for  a moment. ‘And  what  does
this chicken do when it arrives at the other side of the road?’ 
   ‘History does  not relate,’  replied Kate  promptly.  ‘I  think  that
falls outside the scope of the joke, which really only  concerns  itself
with the  journey  of  the  chicken across the  road  and the  chicken’s
reasons for  making  it. It’s  a little  like a Japanese /haiku/ in that
respect.’ 
   Kate  suddenly  found  she  was  enjoying   herself.  She  managed  a
surreptitious  wink at  the  nurse, who  had  no  idea  what to  make of
anything at all. 
   ‘I  see,’ said  Standish once again, and frowned. ‘And do  these, er,
jokes  require the preparatory use of any form of artificial stimulant?’
   ‘Depends on the joke, depends on who it’s being told to.’ 
   ‘Hmm, well I must say, you’ve  certainly  opened up a rich furrow for
me, Miss,  er.  It  seems  to me that  the  whole field of  humour could
benefit from  close and  immediate scrutiny. Clearly we need to sort out
the jokes  which have any kind of genuine psychological value from those
which merely encourage drug abuse and should be stopped. Good.’ 
   He turned to  address the white-coated  researcher  who  was studying
the TV monitor on which Mrs May’s scribblings were being tracked. 
   ‘Anything fresh of value from Mr Einstein?’ he asked. 
   The researcher  did not move  his eyes from  the screen.  He replied,
‘It says “How would you like your eggs? Poached or boiled?”’ 
   Again, Standish paused. 
   ‘Interesting,’  he  said,  ‘very  interesting.  Continue to  make  at
careful  note  of everything  she writes. Come.’  This  last  he said to
Kate, and made his way out of the room. 
   ‘Very  strange  people,  physicists,’ he  said as soon as  they  were
outside  again. ‘In my experience the ones  who aren’t actually dead are
in some way  very ill. Well, the afternoon  presses on and I’m sure that
you  are  keen to get away and write your article, Miss, er. I certainly
have  things  urgently  awaiting my attention and  patients  awaiting my
care. So, if you have no more questions --’ 
   ‘There is just  one thing,  Mr Standish.’ Kate decided,  to hell with
it. ‘We need to emphasise that  it’s up to  the minute.  Perhaps  if you
could spare a couple more minutes we could  go  and see whoever is  your
most recent admission.’ 
   ‘I think that would be a little tricky. Our last admission  was about
a month ago and she died of pneumonia two weeks after admission.’ 
   ‘Oh,  ah.   Well,  perhaps  that  isn’t  so  thrilling.  So.  No  new
admissions  in  the  last  couple  of  days.  No  admissions  of  anyone
particularly large or  blond or  Nordic,  with a fur coat  or  a sledge-
hammer perhaps. I mean,  just for instance.’  An inspiration struck her.
‘A re-admission perhaps?’ 
   Standish regarded her with deepening suspicion. 
   ‘Miss, er --’ 
   ‘Schechter.’ 
   ‘Miss Schechter,  I begin to  get the  impression that your interests
in the hospital are not --’ 
   He was  interrupted  at  that  moment by  the swing-doors just behind
them in  the corridor being pushed open. He looked up to see who it was,
and as he did so his manner changed. 
   He motioned  Kate  sharply  to stand aside while  a large trolley bed
was wheeled through the doors by an orderly. A sister and  another nurse
followed  in attendance,  and  gave  the impression  that they  were the
entourage in  a  procession rather than merely nurses about their normal
business. 
   The occupant of the  trolley was a delicately frail old man with skin
like finely veined parchment. 
   The rear  section  of the  trolley  was  inclined upwards at  a  very
slight angle so that  the old man  could  survey the world as it  passed
him,  and  he surveyed it with a kind of quiet,  benevolent horror.  His
mouth hung  gently open and his head lolled very slightly, so that every
slightest  bump  in the  progress of  the  trolley  caused  it to roll a
little  to  one  side  or  the  other.  Yet  in  spite  of  his  fragile
listlessness,  the  air  he  emanated was  that  of  very quietly,  very
gently, owning everything. 
   It  was  the  one eye which conveyed this.  Each  thing it rested on,
whether it was  the view through a window, or  the nurse who was holding
back  the  door  so  that  the trolley  could  move through  it  without
impediment,  or whether  it was on  Mr  Standish, who suddenly  was  all
obsequious charm  and  obeisance, all seemed instantly gathered  up into
the domain ruled by that eye. 
   Kate  wondered for a  moment how it  was  that eyes conveyed  such an
immense amount of information about their owners.  They were, after all,
merely spheres of white  gristle. They hardly changed as they got older,
apart from  getting a bit redder and a  bit runnier. The iris opened and
closed a bit, but that was all. Where did all this  flood of information
come from? Particularly in  the case of  a man with only one of them and
only a sealed up flap of skin in place of the other. 
   She  was interrupted in this line of thought by the fact that at that
instant the  eye in question moved on from Standish and  settled on her.
The grip it exerted was so startling that she almost yelped. 
   With  the  frailest of faint  motions  the old  man signalled to  the
orderly  who was  pushing the trolley  to  pause. The  trolley drew to a
halt  and when  the noise of its rolling wheels was  stilled  there was,
for a  moment, no  other noise to be heard other than the distant hum of
an elevator. 
   Then the elevator stopped. 
   Kate returned  his look  with a  little smiling frown as  if  to say,
‘Sorry, do  I know you?’ and  then  wondered  to herself if in fact  she
did. There  was  some  fleeting  familiarity  about  his  face, but  she
couldn’t quite catch  it. She  was impressed to notice  that though this
was  only a trolley bed  he was in, the bed  linen that his hands lay on
was real linen, freshly laundered and ironed. 
   Mr Standish coughed slightly and said, ‘Miss, er, this is one  of our
most valued and, er, cherished patients, Mr --’ 
   ‘Are  you  quite  comfortable,  Mr  Odwin?’  interrupted  the  Sister
helpfully.  But  there  was  no need. This  was one patient  whose  name
Standish most certainly knew. 
   Odin quieted her with the slightest of gestures. 
   ‘Mr Odwin,’ said Standish, ‘this is Miss, er --’ 
   Kate was about to  introduce herself  once more when she was suddenly
taken completely by surprise. 
   ‘I  know exactly who she  is,’ said Odin  in  a  quiet  but  distinct
voice, and there was in his eye  for  a moment  the sense  of an aerosol
looking meaningfully at a wasp. 
   She tried to be very formal and English. 
   ‘I’m afraid,’ she said stiffly, ‘that you have the advantage  of me.’
   ‘Yes,’ said Odin. 
   He  gestured  to  the   orderly,  and  together  they  resumed  their
leisurely  passage  down  the  corridor. Glances  were exchanged between
Standish  and the  Sister, and  then Kate was  startled  to  notice that
there was someone else standing in the corridor there with them. 
   He had not, presumably, appeared  there by magic. He had merely stood
still when the trolley  moved on, and his height,  or rather his lack of
it, was such that he had simply hitherto been hidden behind it. 
   Things had been much better when he had been hidden. 
   There  are some people you like immediately, some  whom you think you
might learn to  like in the  fullness of  time, and some that you simply
want  to  push  away  from  you with  a sharp  stick.  It  was instantly
apparent  into which category, for Kate, the person  of Toe Rag fell. He
grinned  and  stared  at  her, or  rather,  appeared to  stare  at  some
invisible fly darting round her head. 
   He ran  up, and  before she  could prevent  him, grabbed  hold of her
right hand in his and shook it wildly up and down. 
   ‘I, too, have  the  advantage  of you, Miss Schechter,’ he  said, and
gleefully skipped away up the corridor. 
   
   
[::: CHAPTER 12 :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::]
   
   The  large,  serious-looking   grey  van  moved  smoothly  down   the
driveway,  emerged  through  the stone  gates and  dipped sedately as it
turned off the  gravel and on  to the  asphalt  of  the public road. The
road  was  a windy  country  lane lined  with the wintry silhouettes  of
leafless oaks and dead elms.  Grey clouds were piled  high as pillows in
the sky.  The van made its stately  progress away down the lane and soon
was lost among its further twists and turns. 
   A  few  minutes  later  the  yellow  Citroën  made  its less  stately
appearance between the  gates. It turned its splayed wheels up on to the
camber of the  lane and set off at a slow but difficult rate in the same
direction. 
   Kate was rattled. 
   The  last  few  minutes  had been  rather  unpleasant.  Standish  was
clearly  an  oddly behaved man  at  the best of times, but  after  their
encounter  with the patient  named Odwin,  he  had  turned unequivocally
hostile.  It  was  the  frightening  hostility  of  one who  was himself
frightened -- of what, Kate did not know. 
   Who  was she?  he  had  demanded  to  know.  How  had she wheedled  a
reference out of  Alan Franklin, a respected man in the profession? What
was  she after?  What -- and this  seemed  to  be the big one -- had she
done to arouse the disapprobation of Mr Odwin? 
   She held the car grimly  to the  road as it negotiated the bends with
considerable difficulty  and the  straight  sections with only  slightly
less. The car had  landed her  in court on  one occasion when one of its
front wheels  had  sailed off  on a  little  expedition of  its own  and
nearly caused an accident. The  police witness in court had  referred to
her beloved Citroën as ‘the alleged car’  and the  name had subsequently
stuck. She was  particularly fond of the  alleged car for many  reasons.
If  one of its doors, for instance,  fell off she could  put it back  on
herself, which is more than you could say for a BMW. 
   She  wondered if  she looked  as  pale and wan  as she  felt, but the
rear-view mirror was rattling around under  the  seat so she was  spared
the knowledge. 
   Standish  himself had become quite white and shaky at the  very  idea
of anybody  crossing  Mr  Odwin  and had  dismissed out  of  hand Kate’s
attempts to deny that she  knew anything of him at all. If that were the
case,  he had demanded of her, why then had  Mr Odwin  made it perfectly
clear  that he knew her? Was she accusing Mr Odwin  of being a  liar? If
she was then she should have a care for herself. 
   Kate  did  not  know.  The encounter  with Mr  Odwin  was  completely
inexplicable to  her.  But she could  not deny to  herself that the  man
packed some  kind of punch. When he  looked at you you stayed looked at.
But  beneath  the disturbing  quality of  his steady  gaze had lain some
even more disturbing  undercurrents.  They were  more disturbing because
they were undercurrents of weakness and fear. 
   And as for the other creature... 
   Clearly  he was the  cause of the stories that had arisen recently in
the more extremely abhorrent sectors of  the tabloid  press  about there
being ‘Something Nasty in the Woodshead’.  The stories  had,  of course,
been  offensive and callously insensitive and  had  largely been ignored
by everybody in the country except for  those very few millions who were
keen on offensive and callously insensitive things. 
   The  stories   had  claimed  that   people   in  the  area  had  been
‘terrorised’  by some repulsively  deformed  ‘goblin-like’ creature  who
regularly broke out of the  Woodshead and committed an impressively wide
range of unspeakable acts. 
   Like most  people, Kate had assumed, insofar as she had thought about
it  at  all,  that  what  had  actually  happened  was  that  some  poor
bewildered mental patient  had wandered out  of the grounds and  given a
couple of passing old ladies a bit  of a turn,  and that  the  slavering
hacks of Wapping had done the rest. Now she was  a little more shaky and
a little less sure. 
   He -- it -- had known her name. 
   What could she make of that? 
   What  she  made of it  was a wrong  turning. In her preoccupation she
missed the turning  that  would take her  on to  the main  road back  to
London, and then had to work out  what to do about  it. She could simply
do  a three-point turn and go back, but it was a long time since she had
last put the car into reverse gear, and she  was frankly  a  bit nervous
about how it would take to it. 
   She tried taking  the next two right turns to  see if that would  set
her straight, but she had no  great hopes of this actually  working, and
was  right  not  to have.  She  drove on for two or three miles, knowing
that  she was on  the wrong road but at least, judging from the position
of the  lighter  grey  smear in  the  grey clouds,  going in  the  right
direction. 
   After a while  she  settled down  to  this new  route.  A  couple  of
signposts she passed  made it  clear  to her that she was  merely taking
the B route back to London now, which she was perfectly  happy to do. If
she had thought about it in advance,  she would probably have  chosen to
do so anyway in preference to the busy trunk road. 
   The  trip  had been a  total  failure,  and she would  have done  far
better  simply to  have stayed soaking  in  the bath all  afternoon. The
whole   experience  had  been  thoroughly  disturbing,  verging  on  the
frightening, and she had drawn a complete blank  as  far  as her  actual
objective  was concerned. It was bad enough having an objective that she
could hardly bring herself  to admit to,  without  having it  completely
fall  apart on her as well. A sense of  stale  futility gradually closed
in on her along with the general greyness of the sky. 
   She wondered if she was going  very  slightly mad. Her life seemed to
have drifted  completely out of her control in the last few days, and it
was distressing to realise  just how fragile her grip  was when it could
so easily  be shattered by  a relatively  minor thunderbolt or meteorite
or whatever it was. 
   The  word ‘thunderbolt’ seemed to  have arrived in the middle of that
thought without warning and she  didn’t know what to make  of it, so she
just let  it lie there at  the bottom of her mind, like the towel  lying
on her bathroom floor that she hadn’t been bothered to pick up. 
   She  longed for  some sun  to break  through. The miles  ground along
under  her  wheels, the clouds ground her  down,  and she  found herself
increasingly thinking of penguins.  At last she  felt she could stand it
no  more and decided that  a  few minutes’ walk  was  what she needed to
shake her out of her mood. 
   She stopped the car at the side  of the road, and the elderly  Jaguar
which had been  following her for  the last seventeen miles ran straight
into the back of her, which worked just as well. 
   
   
[::: CHAPTER 13 :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::]
   
   With a delicious shock of rage  Kate leapt,  invigorated,  out of her
car and  ran to harangue the  driver of the other  car who was, in turn,
leaping out of his in order to harangue her. 
   ‘Why don’t you look  where you’re going?’ she yelled at him. He was a
rather overweight man who had  been driving  wearing a long leather coat
and  a  rather  ugly  red  hat,  despite  the discomfort  this obviously
involved. Kate warmed to him for it. 
   ‘Why don’t  I look where I’m going?’ he replied  heatedly. ‘Don’t you
look in your rear-view mirror?’ 
   ‘No,’ said Kate, putting her fists on her hips. 
   ‘Oh,’ said her adversary. ‘Why not?’ 
   ‘Because it’s under the seat.’ 
   ‘I  see,’ he replied grimly. ‘Thank you for being  so  frank with me.
Do you have a lawyer?’ 
   ‘Yes I  do, as a matter of fact,’ said Kate. She said it with vim and
hauteur. 
   ‘Is he any good?’  said the man  in the hat.  ‘I’m going to need one.
Mine’s popped into prison for a while.’ 
   ‘Well, you certainly can’t have mine.’ 
   ‘Why not?’ 
   ‘Don’t be absurd. It would be a clear conflict of interest.’ 
   Her adversary folded his arms and  leant back  against  the bonnet of
his car.  He took his time  to survey  the  surroundings.  The lane  was
growing dim as the early winter evening began  to settle on the land. He
then  leant into his car to  turn on his  hazard warning indicators. The
rear amber  lights winked prettily on the scrubby grass of the roadside.
The  front lights were buried in the rear of Kate’s Citroën and  were in
no fit state to wink. 
   He   resumed  his  leaning  posture  and  looked  Kate  up  and  down
appraisingly. 
   ‘You are a  driver,’ he said,  ‘and  I use  the word in  the  loosest
possible sense,  i.e. meaning  merely  somebody who occupies the driving
seat of what I  will for  the moment call -- but I use the term strictly
without prejudice -- a car  while  it is proceeding  along the road,  of
stupendous,  I would even say verging  on the superhuman, lack of skill.
Do you catch my drift?’ 
   ‘No.’ 
   ‘I mean you  do not drive well. Do you know you’ve been all  over the
road for the last seventeen miles?’ 
   ‘Seventeen miles!’ exclaimed Kate. ‘Have you been following me?’ 
   ‘Only up to a point,’ said  Dirk. ‘I’ve tried to stay on this side of
the road.’ 
   ‘I see. Well,  thank you in turn  for being so frank with me. This, I
need hardly tell you, is an outrage. You’d  better  get yourself  a damn
good lawyer, because mine’s going to stick red-hot skewers in him.’ 
   ‘Perhaps I should get myself a kebab instead.’ 
   ‘You look as if you’ve had quite  enough  kebabs.  May I ask you  why
you were following me?’ 
   ‘You looked as if you knew where  you  were  going. To  begin with at
least. For the first hundred yards or so.’
   ‘What the hell’s it got to do with you where I was going?’ 
   ‘Navigational technique of mine.’ 
   Kate narrowed her eyes. 
   She was  about to demand  a  full  and  instant explanation  of  this
preposterous remark when a passing white Ford Sierra slowed down  beside
them. 
   The  driver wound down the window and leant  out. ‘Had a crash then?’
he shouted at them. 
   ‘Yes.’ 
   ‘Ha!’ he said and drove on. 
   A second or two later a Peugeot stopped by them. 
   ‘Who was that just  now?’  the driver asked them, in reference to the
previous driver who had just stopped. 
   ‘I don’t know,’ said Dirk. 
   ‘Oh,’  said the driver. ‘You look as  if you’ve  bad a crash  of some
sort.’ 
   ‘Yes,’ said Dirk. 
   ‘Thought so,’ said the driver and drove on. 
   ‘You  don’t  get the same quality of  passers-by these days, do you?’
said Dirk to Kate. 
   ‘You get  hit by some  real dogs, too,’ said  Kate. ‘I still  want to
know  why you were following  me. You realise that  it’s hard for me not
to see you in the role of an extremely sinister sort of a person.’ 
   ‘That’s  easily  explained,’  said  Dirk.  ‘Usually  I  am.  On  this
occasion, however, I simply  got lost.  I  was forced  to  take  evasive
action  by a large grey oncoming van which took  a proprietorial view of
the  road. I only avoided it by nipping down a side lane  in which I was
then unable to  reverse. A few turnings later and I was thoroughly lost.
There is  a school of thought which  says that you  should consult a map
on these occasions, but to such people I  merely say,  “Ha!  What if you
have  no  map to consult? What  if  you  have  a  map but  it’s  of  the
Dordogne?” My own strategy is  to find a car, or the nearest equivalent,
which looks as if  it knows where it’s going and follow it. I rarely end
up  where I was  intending to go, but often  I end up  somewhere  that I
needed to be. So what do you say to that?’ 
   ‘Piffle.’ 
   ‘A robust response. I salute you.’ 
   ‘I was  going to say that I do the  same thing  myself sometimes, but
I’ve decided not to admit that yet.’ 
   ‘Very wise,’ said  Dirk.  ‘You don’t  want to give away  too  much at
this point. Play it enigmatic is my advice.’ 
   ‘I  don’t  want  your advice.  Where  were  you  trying to get before
suddenly   deciding  that  driving  seventeen  miles  in  the   opposite
direction would help you get there?’ 
   ‘A place called the Woodshead.’ 
   ‘Ah, the mental hospital.’ 
   ‘You know it?’ 
   ‘I’ve  been  driving away from it for the last  seventeen miles and I
wish  it was further. Which ward will you be in? I need to know where to
send the repair bill.’ 
   ‘They don’t  have  wards,’ said Dirk.  ‘And I  think  they  would  be
distressed to hear you call it a mental hospital.’ 
   ‘Anything that distresses ‘em is fine by me.’ 
   Dirk looked about him. 
   ‘A fine evening,’ he said. 
   ‘No it isn’t.’ 
   ‘I see,’ said  Dirk.  ‘You  have, if I may say so, the  air of one to
whom her day has not been a source of joy or spiritual enrichment.’ 
   ‘Too  damn right, it  hasn’t,’ said Kate. ‘I’ve  had the sort of  day
that would make St  Francis of Assisi kick babies.  Particularly  if you
include  Tuesday in with today,  which is  the last  time I was actually
conscious.  And now look. My  beautiful car. The only thing I can say in
favour of the whole shebang is that at least I’m not in Oslo.’ 
   ‘I can see how that might cheer you.’ 
   ‘I didn’t say  it cheered me. It just about  stops me killing myself.
I might as well save myself the  bother anyway, with  people like you so
keen to do it for me.’ 
   ‘You were my able assistant, Miss Schechter.’ 
   ‘/Stop doing that!/’ 
   ‘Stop doing what?’ 
   ‘My name! Suddenly  every stranger  I  meet knows  my name. Would you
guys please just quit  knowing my name for one second? How can a girl be
enigmatic under these conditions? The only person  I met who didn’t seem
to know my name was the only one  I  actually introduced  myself to. All
right,’  she  said, pointing  an  accusing finger  at Dirk,  ‘you’re not
supernatural,  so just tell me how you knew  my name. I’m not letting go
of your tie till you tell me.’ 
   ‘You haven’t got hold of  --’ 
   ‘I have now, buster.’ 
   ‘Unhand me!’ 
   ‘Why  were  you  following me?’  insisted Kate. ‘How  do you  know my
name?’ 
   ‘I was  following you  for  exactly the reasons stated.  As for  your
name, my dear lady, you practically told me yourself.’ 
   ‘I did not.’ 
   ‘I assure you, you did.’ 
   ‘I’m still holding your tie.’ 
   ‘If you  are meant to  be  in  Oslo  but have  been unconscious since
Tuesday, then  presumably  you were at the incredible exploding check-in
counter at Heathrow Terminal Two. It was widely  reported  in the press.
I expect you missed  it through being  unconscious.  I myself missed  it
through  rampant apathy,  but the  events of today have rather forced it
on my attention.’ 
   Kate grudgingly let go  of his  tie,  but continued  to eye  him with
suspicion. 
   ‘Oh yeah?’ she said. ‘What events?’ 
   ‘Disturbing  ones,’ said Dirk, brushing  himself down. ‘Even if  what
you had told me  yourself had not been enough  to identify you, then the
fact  of your  having also been today to visit the Woodshead clinched it
for me. I gather from your mood of  belligerent despondency that the man
you were seeking was not there.’ 
   ‘/What?/’ 
   ‘Please, have  it,’  said  Dirk,  rapidly  pulling  off  his  tie and
handing it to  her. ‘By  chance I  ran into a  nurse from your  hospital
earlier  today.  My first  encounter with her was one which, for various
reasons,  I was anxious to  terminate abruptly. It  was only while I was
standing on the pavement a minute  or two later, fending  off  the local
wildlife, that one of the words I  had heard her  say struck me,  I  may
say,  somewhat  like a thunderbolt. The  idea  was fantastically, wildly
improbable. But like most fantastically, wildly improbable ideas  it was
at least as worthy of consideration  as  a more mundane one to which the
facts had been strenuously bent to fit. 
   ‘I returned  to  question her  further,  and  she  confirmed  that  a
somewhat unusual patient had, in the  early  hours of the  morning, been
transferred from the hospital, apparently to the Woodshead. 
   ‘She  also  confided  to  me  that another  patient  had  been almost
indecently curious to find out what  had become of him. That patient was
a Miss Kate Schechter, and I think you  will agree, Miss Schechter, that
my  methods of  navigation have their  advantages. I may  not  have gone
where I intended  to go, but I  think I have ended up where I needed  to
be.’ 
   
   
[::: CHAPTER 14 :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::]
   
   After about half an hour a  hefty  man  from the local garage arrived
with a  pick-up  truck,  a  tow-rope and  a  son.  Having looked  at the
situation  he  sent his  son  and  the pick-up truck away to  deal  with
another job, attached  the tow-rope to Kate’s now defunct car and pulled
it away to the garage himself. 
   Kate  was  a little quiet about this  for  a minute or two, and  then
said, ‘He wouldn’t have done that if I hadn’t been an American.’ 
   He had recommended to them a small  local pub where he would come and
look for them when  he had  made  his  diagnosis on  the Citroën.  Since
Dirk’s  Jaguar had  only lost its front  right indicator light, and Dirk
insisted that he hardly ever turned right  anyway, they  drove the short
distance  there. As Kate, with some reluctance, climbed into  Dirk’s car
she found  the Howard  Bell  book  which Dirk had  purloined  from Sally
Mills in  the café, and pounced on it. A few minutes later, walking into
the pub, she was still trying to work out if it was one  she had read or
not. 
   The  pub  combined all  the traditional English  qualities  of  horse
brasses,  Formica  and surliness. The sound  of Michael  Jackson  in the
other  bar mingled with the mournful intermittence of the glass-cleaning
machine in this one to  create an aural ambience which perfectly matched
the elderly paintwork in its dinginess. 
   Dirk bought  himself and  Kate  a  drink each, and then joined her at
the  small  corner table  she  had  found away from the  fat,  T-shirted
hostility of the bar. 
   ‘I  have read  it,’ she  announced, having  thumbed her  way  by  now
through most of  /Run  Like the Devil/. ‘At least, I started it and read
the first  couple of  chapters. A couple of months ago, in fact. I don’t
know  why I still  read his books. It’s perfectly clear  that his editor
doesn’t.’  She looked up at Dirk. ‘I wouldn’t  have thought it was  your
sort of thing. From what little I know of you.’ 
   ‘It isn’t,’ said Dirk. ‘I, er, picked it up by mistake.’ 
   ‘That’s  what everyone  says,’  replied Kate.  ‘He  used to  be quite
good,’ she  added  ‘if  you liked that  sort of thing.  My  brother’s in
publishing  in  New York, and  he  says  Howard Bell’s gone very strange
nowadays. I get the feeling that they’re  all a little afraid of him and
he quite likes that.  Certainly no  one seems to have  the guts to  tell
him  he should cut  chapters ten to  twenty-seven inclusive. And all the
stuff about  the  goat. The theory  is that  the reason he sells so many
millions  of copies is that nobody ever  does read them. If everyone who
bought them actually read  them they’d never bother to  buy the next one
and his career would be over.’ 
   She pushed it away from her. 
   ‘Anyway,’  she said, ‘you’ve very cleverly told me why  I went to the
Woodshead; you haven’t told me why you were going there yourself.’ 
   Dirk shrugged. ‘To see what it was like,’ he said, non-commitally. 
   ‘Oh  yes?  Well,  I’ll save  you  the  bother.  The  place  is  quite
horrible.’ 
   ‘Describe it. In fact start with the airport.’ 
   Kate took a hefty swig  at her Bloody Mary and brooded silently for a
moment while the vodka marched around inside her. 
   ‘You want to hear about the airport as well?’ she said at last. 
   ‘Yes.’ 
   Kate drained the rest of her drink. 
   ‘I’ll need another  one, then,’  she  said and pushed the empty glass
across at him. 
   Dirk  braved the bug-eyedness of the  barman and returned a minute or
two later with a refill for Kate. 
   ‘OK,’ said Kate. ‘I’ll start with the cat.’ 
   ‘What cat?’ 
   ‘The cat I  needed to ask the next-door neighbour  to  look after for
me.’ 
   ‘Which next-door neighbour?’ 
   ‘The one that died.’ 
   ‘I see,’ said Dirk. ‘Tell you what, why  don’t I just shut up and let
you tell me?’ 
   ‘Yes,’ said Kate, ‘that would be good.’ 
   Kate recounted  the  events of the  last few days, or at least, those
she was conscious for, and  then  moved  on to  her  impressions  of the
Woodshead. 
   Despite the  distaste with which she described it, it sounded to Dirt
like exactly the sort of place he  would love to  retire to, if possible
tomorrow. It  combined  a dedication to the inexplicable,  which was his
own persistent vice (he  could only think of it as  such, and  sometimes
would rail against  it  with the  fury of an  addict),  with a  pampered
self-indulgence  which was a vice to which he would love  to be  able to
aspire if he could ever but afford it. 
   At last Kate  related her  disturbing encounter with Mr Odwin and his
repellent minion,  and  it was as  a result of  this that Dirk  remained
sunk  in  a frowning silence for a minute  afterwards. A large  part  of
this  minute  was  in fact taken  up  with  an internal  struggle  about
whether  or not he was  going to  cave in and have  a cigarette. He  had
recently foresworn them and the struggle was a regular one  and he  lost
it regularly, often without noticing. 
   He decided, with  triumph,  that he would not have one, and then took
one out anyway. Fishing  out his  lighter from  the  capacious pocket of
his coat  involved first  taking  out the envelope  he  had removed from
Geoffrey  Aristey’s bathroom. He  put it on  the table next to the  book
and lit his cigarette. 
   ‘The check-in girl at the airport...’ he said at last. 
   ‘She drove  me mad,’ said Kate, instantly. ‘She just went through the
motions  of  doing her  job like some  kind  of blank machine.  Wouldn’t
listen, wouldn’t think. I don’t know  where they find people like that.’
   ‘She  used to be my secretary, in  fact,’ said Dirk. ‘They don’t seem
to know where to find her now, either.’ 
   ‘Oh.  I’m sorry,’ said Kate  immediately,  and then reflected  for  a
moment. 
   ‘I expect you’re going  to say that she wasn’t like that really,’ she
continued.  ‘Well,  that’s  possible.  I expect she  was just  shielding
herself from the frustrations of her job. It  must  drive you insensible
working  at an  airport.  I  think  I would have sympathised if I hadn’t
been so goddamn frustrated  myself. I’m  sorry, I didn’t know. So that’s
what you’re trying to find out about.’ 
   Dirk  gave a non-committal type  of  nod.  ‘Amongst other things,’ he
said. Then he added, ‘I’m a private detective.’ 
   ‘Oh?’ said Kate in surprise, and then looked puzzled. 
   ‘Does that bother you?’ 
   ‘It’s just that I have a friend who plays the double bass.’ 
   ‘I see,’ said Dirk. 
   ‘Whenever people meet  him  and he’s struggling  around with it, they
all  say the same thing, and it drives him crazy. They all say,  “I  bet
you wished you  played the piccolo.” Nobody ever  works out that  that’s
what  everybody else says. I  was just trying to  work  out if there was
something  that  everybody would  always say to a private detective,  so
that I could avoid saying it.’ 
   ‘No.  What happens is that everybody looks very shifty  for a moment,
and you got that very well.’ 
   ‘I see.’ Kate  looked disappointed. ‘Well,  do you  have any clues --
that is to say, any idea about what’s happened to your secretary?’ 
   ‘No,’ said  Dirk, ‘no idea. Just a vague image that I don’t know what
to make of.’ He  toyed thoughtfully with his cigarette, and then let his
gaze wander over the table again and on to the book. 
   He  picked  it up and looked it over, wondering what impulse had made
him pick it up in the first place. 
   ‘I don’t really know anything about Howard Bell,’ he said. 
   Kate  was surprised at  the  way he suddenly changed the subject, but
also a little relieved. 
   ‘I  only  know,’ said  Dirk,  ‘that he sells  a lot of books and that
they all look pretty much like this. What should I know?’ 
   ‘Well, there are some very strange stories about him.’ 
   ‘Like what?’ 
   ‘Like what he gets  up to in hotel suites all  across America. No one
knows  the  details, of  course, they  just get the  bills  and pay them
because they don’t like  to  ask. They feel they’re  on safer  ground if
they don’t know. Particularly about the chickens.’ 
   ‘Chickens?’ said Dirk. ‘What chickens?’ 
   ‘Well apparently,’ said Kate, lowering her  voice and leaning forward
a  little,  ‘he’s  always having  live chickens  delivered to  his hotel
room.’ 
   Dirk frowned. 
   ‘What on earth for?’ he said. 
   ‘Nobody  knows. Nobody ever knows what  happens to them.  Nobody ever
sees  them  again. Not,’ she said,  leaning  even  further  forward, and
dropping her voice still further, ‘a single feather.’ 
   Dirk wondered if he was being hopelessly innocent and naïve. 
   ‘So what do people think he’s doing with them?’ he asked. 
   ‘Nobody,’ Kate said, ‘has the  faintest idea. They don’t even  /want/
to have the faintest idea. They just don’t know.’ 
   She shrugged and picked the book up again herself. 
   ‘The  other thing David --  that’s my  brother -- says about  him  is
that he has the absolute perfect bestseller’s name.’ 
   ‘Really?’ said Dirk. ‘In what way?’ 
   ‘David says it’s  the  first thing any publisher  looks for  in a new
author. Not,  “Is his stuff  any good?”  or, “Is his stuff any good once
you  get rid  of all the  adjectives?” but, “Is  his last name nice  and
short  and  his first name just a  bit longer?”  You see?  The “Bell” is
done  in huge silver letters, and the  “Howard”  fits neatly across  the
top  in  slightly  narrower  ones.  Instant trade mark.  It’s publishing
magic.  Once you’ve got a  name like  that then whether you can actually
write  or not is  a minor matter. Which in  Howard Bell’s case is  now a
significant bonus.  But it’s a  very ordinary name if  you write it down
in the normal way, like it is here you see.’ 
   ‘What?’ said Dirk. 
   ‘Here on this envelope of yours.’ 
   ‘Where? Let me see.’ 
   ‘That’s his name there, isn’t it? Crossed out.’ 
   ‘Good heavens, you’re right,’  said Dirk, peering at the envelope. ‘I
suppose I didn’t recognise it without its trade mark shape.’ 
   ‘Is this something  to do with him,  then?’ asked Kate, picking it up
and looking it over. 
   ‘I don’t  know what it is, exactly,’ said Dirk. ‘It’s something to do
with a contract, and it may be something to do with a record.’ 
   ‘I can see it might be to do with a record.’ 
   ‘How can you see that?’ asked Dirk, sharply. 
   ‘Well, this name here is Dennis Hutch, isn’t it? See?’ 
   ‘Oh  yes.  Yes, I  do,’ said  Dirk, examining it  for  himself.  ‘Er,
should I know that name?’ 
   ‘Well,’  said Kate slowly,  ‘it depends  if  you’re alive or  not,  I
suppose. He’s  the head  of the Aries  Rising  Record Group. Less famous
than the Pope, I grant you, but -- you know of the Pope I take it?’ 
   ‘Yes, yes,’ said Dirk impatiently, ‘white-haired chap.’ 
   ‘That’s him. He  seems to be  about  the  only  person  of  note this
envelope hasn’t been addressed  to at some time. Here’s Stan Dubcek, the
head  of  Dubcek,  Danton, Heidegger, Draycott.  I know they handle  the
ARRGH! account.’ 
   ‘The...?’ 
   ‘ARRGH!  Aries  Rising Record  Group Holdings.  Getting  that account
made the agency’s fortunes.’ 
   She looked at Dirk. 
   ‘You have the  air,’ she  stated,  ‘of  one  who knows  little of the
record business or the advertising business.’ 
   ‘I have that honour,’ said Dirk, graciously inclining his head. 
   ‘So what are you doing with this?’ 
   ‘When I manage to get it open, I’ll  know,’ said Dirk. ‘Do you have a
knife on you?’ 
   Kate shook her head. 
   ‘Who’s Geoffrey Anstey,  then?’ she  asked.  ‘He’s the only name  not
crossed out. Friend of yours?’ 
   Dirk  paled  a little and didn’t  immediately  answer.  Then he said,
‘This  strange  person  you  mentioned,  this  “Something  Nasty in  the
Woodshead” creature. Tell me again what he said to you.’ 
   ‘He said, “I, too, have the advantage of you, Miss  Schechter.”’ Kate
tried to shrug. 
   Dirk weighed his thoughts uncertainly for a moment. 
   ‘I think it is just possible,’ he said at last, ‘that  you may be  in
some kind of danger.’ 
   ‘You mean it’s possible that  passing lunatics  may  crash into me in
the road? That kind of danger?’ 
   ‘Maybe even worse.’ 
   ‘Oh yeah?’ 
   ‘Yes.’ 
   ‘And what makes you think that?’ 
   ‘It’s  not  entirely  clear to me  yet,’  replied  Dirk with a frown.
‘Most of the ideas I  have at the moment have to do with things that are
completely  impossible,  so I am  wary about  sharing  them.  They  are,
however, the only thoughts I have.’ 
   ‘I’d  get  some  different ones,  then,’  said  Kate.  ‘What was  the
Sherlock Holmes principle?  “Once  you have  discounted  the impossible,
then whatever remains, however improbable, must be the truth.”’ 
   ‘I reject  that entirely,’  said Dirk, sharply. ‘The impossible often
has a kind  of integrity to  it which the  merely improbable  lacks. How
often have  you been  presented with an apparently rational  explanation
of something which works in  all  respects other than one, which is just
that it is hopelessly improbable? Your instinct is to  say, “Yes, but he
or she simply wouldn’t do that.”’ 
   ‘Well, it happened to me today, in fact,’ replied Kate. 
   ‘Ah yes,’ said  Dirk, slapping the table and making the glasses jump,
‘your girl in the wheelchair -- a perfect  example. The idea that she is
somehow  receiving  yesterday’s  stock  market  prices apparently out of
thin  air is  merely impossible,  and  therefore  /must/  be  the  case,
because  the  idea that  she is maintaining  an  immensely  complex  and
laborious hoax of  no benefit  to herself is  hopelessly improbable. The
first idea merely supposes that  there is something we don’t know about,
and God  knows  there are  enough of  those. The  second,  however, runs
contrary to  something fundamental and human which we do know  about. We
should  therefore  be  very  suspicious  of  it  and  all  its  specious
rationality.’ 
   ‘But you won’t tell me what you think.’ 
   ‘No.’ 
   ‘Why not?’ 
   ‘Because  it  sounds ridiculous. But I  think  you are in  danger.  I
think you might be in horrible danger.’ 
   ‘Great. So what do  you  suggest  I do about  it?’ said Kate taking a
sip of her second drink, which otherwise had stayed almost untouched. 
   ‘I suggest,’ said  Dirk  seriously, ‘that you come back to London and
spend the night in my house.’ 
   Kate  hooted with laughter and then had to fish out a Kleenex to wipe
tomato juice off herself. 
   ‘I’m sorry,  what  is so extraordinary  about  that?’ demanded  Dirk,
rather taken aback. 
   ‘It’s just the  most wonderfully perfunctory pick-up line  I’ve  ever
heard.’ She  smiled  at him.  ‘I’m  afraid  the answer  is a  resounding
“no”.’ 
   He was, she thought,  interesting,  entertaining in an eccentric kind
of way, but also hideously unattractive to her. 
   Dirk  felt  very  awkward. ‘I think  there  has  been some  appalling
misunderstanding,’ he said. ‘Allow me to explain that --’ 
   He  was  interrupted  by  the  sudden  arrival in their midst  of the
mechanic from the garage with news of Kate’s car. 
   ‘Fixed it,’ he said.  ‘In fact there  were nothing to fix other  than
the  bumper.  Nothing new that is. The  funny noise you  mentioned  were
just  the  engine. But it’ll go  all right. You just have to rev her up,
let in the clutch,  and then wait for a little bit longer than you might
normally expect.’ 
   Kate  thanked him a little stiffly for this  advice and then insisted
on allowing Dirk to pay the £25 he was charging for it. 
   Outside, in the car  park, Dirk repeated his urgent request that Kate
should go with him, but  she  was adamant that all she needed was a good
night’s sleep and  that  everything  would  look  bright  and  clear and
easily capable of being coped with in the morning. 
   Dirk  insisted that they should at least exchange phone numbers. Kate
agreed  to this  on condition  that  Dirk found  another  route  back to
London and didn’t sit on her tail. 
   ‘Be very  careful,’ Dirk called to her as her car grumbled out  on to
the road. 
   ‘I  will,’  shouted  Kate,  ‘and if  anything impossible  happens,  I
promise you’ll be the first to know.’ 
   For a brief moment, the yellow undulations of  the  car gleamed dully
in the light  leaking from the  pub  windows  and stood  out against the
heavily hunched greyness of the night sky which soon swallowed it up. 
   Dirk tried to follow her, but his car wouldn’t start. 
   
   
[::: CHAPTER 15 :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::]
   
   The  clouds  sank more  heavily  over the land,  clenching  into huge
sullen  towers, as Dirk, in  a  sudden excess of  alarm, had to call out
the  man from  the garage once again.  He  was slower to arrive with his
truck this time and bad-tempered with drink when at last he did. 
   He   emitted   a  few  intemperate  barks   of   laughter  at  Dirk’s
predicament,  then fumbled  the bonnet of his car open and subjected him
to all  kinds of  muttered talk about manifolds, pumps,  alternators and
starlings and  resolutely  would  not be drawn on whether or  not he was
going to be able to get the thing to go again that night. 
   Dirk  was unable  to  get a meaningful answer, or  at least an answer
that meant anything to  him, as  to  what was  causing the rumpus in the
alternator, what  ailed  the fuel pump, in what way the operation of the
starter motor was being disrupted and why the timing was off. 
   He did  at last understand that the mechanic was also claiming that a
family of  starlings  had at some time in  the past made their nest in a
sensitive part  of  the engine’s workings and had subsequently  perished
horribly, taking sensitive parts  of  the  engine with them, and at this
point Dirk began to cast about himself desperately for what to do. 
   He  noticed  that the mechanic’s pick-up  truck was  standing  nearby
with  its  engine still  running,  and elected  to make  off  with  this
instead.  Being  a  slightly less  slow and  cumbersome runner  than the
mechanic he was  able to put this plan  into operation with a minimum of
difficulty. 
   He swung  out into the  lane, drove off  into  the  night  and parked
three miles down the road. He  left the van’s  lights on,  let down  its
tyres and hid himself  behind a tree. After about ten minutes his Jaguar
came  hurtling round the  corner, passed  the van,  hauled itself  to an
abrupt halt  and reversed  wildly back  towards it.  The  mechanic threw
open  the  door,  leapt out  and hurried over  to  reclaim his property,
leaving  Dirk  with the  opportunity he  needed to leap  from behind the
tree and reclaim his own. 
   He  spun  his  wheels pointedly  and  drove  off in  a  kind  of grim
triumph,  still  haunted,  nevertheless,  by anxieties to  which  he was
unable to give a name or shape. 
   Kate,  in the meantime, had  joined  the dimly glowing yellow  stream
that led  on  eventually through the western suburbs of Acton and Ealing
and  into the heart  of London. She crawled up over the  Westway flyover
and soon afterwards turned north up towards Primrose Hill and home. 
   She  always enjoyed driving up alongside the park, and the dark night
shapes of the  trees soothed her and made  her long for the quietness of
her bed. 
   She found the  nearest parking space  she could  to her  front  door,
which was about thirty yards  distant. She climbed  out  of the car  and
carefully omitted  to lock it. She never  left anything of value in  it,
and  she found that it  was to her  advantage if  people didn’t  have to
break anything  in order  to  find  that out.  The  car had been  stolen
twice, but  on each  occasion  it  had been found abandoned twenty yards
away. 
   She didn’t  go  straight home  but  set  off instead  in the opposite
direction to get  some milk and bin liners from the small corner shop in
the next street. She agreed with the gentle-faced  Pakistani  who ran it
that she  did indeed look  tired, and should have an early night, but on
the way  back she  made  another small  diversion to go and lean against
the railings of the park, gaze into  its darkness for a few minutes, and
breathe in  some  of its cold, heavy night air. At  last she  started to
head back  towards  her flat. She  turned into her  own road and as  she
passed the first street lamp it  flickered and  went out, leaving her in
a small pool of darkness. 
   That sort of thing always gives one a nasty turn. 
   It is said that there is nothing surprising about the notion  of, for
instance, a person suddenly thinking about  someone they haven’t thought
about for years, and then  discovering  the next day that the person has
in fact just  died. There are always lots of people suddenly remembering
people they  haven’t  thought  about for ages, and always lots of people
dying.  In a  population  the size of, say, America  the law of averages
means that  this particular coincidence must happen at least ten times a
day, but it is none the less spooky to anyone who experiences it. 
   By the  same token, there are light bulbs burning out in street lamps
all the time, and  a fair  few of  them must go pop just as  someone  is
passing  beneath them.  Even  so, it still gives the person concerned  a
nasty turn, especially  when the very next street lamp  they pass  under
does exactly the same thing. 
   Kate stood rooted to the spot. 
   If  one  coincidence  can  occur,  she  told  herself,  then  another
coincidence  can  occur. And if one coincidence happens  to  occur  just
after  another  coincidence, then that is just  a coincidence. There was
absolutely nothing to feel alarmed  about in having  a couple of  street
lamps go pop. She was in a perfectly normal friendly  street with houses
all around her  with their lights on. She looked up at the house next to
her, unfortunately just as the lights  in its front window chanced to go
out.  This was presumably because the occupants happened to choose  that
moment to  leave the room, but though it just  went to show what a truly
extraordinary  thing  coincidence can  be it  did  tittle to improve her
state of mind. 
   The rest of the  street was still bathed in a dim yellow glow. It was
only  the  few feet immediately around her that  were suddenly dark. The
next pool of  light  was just  a few footsteps away in front of her. She
took a  deep breath,  pulled  herself together,  and  walked towards it,
reaching   its  very  centre  at   the  exact  instant  that  it,   too,
extinguished itself. 
   The occupants  of  the  two  houses she had  passed  on the way  also
happened to choose that moment to leave their front rooms,  as did their
neighbours on the opposite side of the street. 
   Perhaps  a  popular television show had just finished. That’s what it
was. Everyone was  getting up and turning  off their TV sets  and lights
simultaneously,  and  the resulting  power surge was blowing some of the
street lamps. Something like that. The resulting  power  surge  was also
making  her blood pound  a little. She moved  on, trying to be calm.  As
soon as she  got home  she’d have a look in  the paper  to see  what the
programme had been that had caused three street lamps to blow. 
   Four. 
   She  stopped and  stood absolutely  still  under the dark  lamp. More
houses  were darkening. What she found  particularly  alarming was  that
they darkened at the very moment that she looked at them. 
   Glance -- /pop/. 
   She tried it again. 
   Glance -- /pop/. 
   Each one she looked at darkened instantly. 
   Glance -- /pop/. 
   She realised with a sudden start  of fear that she must  stop herself
looking at the  ones that were still lit.  The  rationalisations she had
been  trying  to  construct  were  now  running around  inside  her head
screaming to be let out and she let them go.  She tried to lock her eyes
to the ground for fear of extinguishing the  whole  street, but couldn’t
help tiny glances to see if it was working. 
   Glance -- /pop/. 
   She froze  her gaze, down on to the narrow path forward.  Most of the
road was dark now. 
   There were three remaining street  lamps between  her  and  the front
door  which led to her own flat. Though she  kept her eyes averted,  she
thought  she could detect on the periphery of her vision that the lights
of the flat downstairs from hers were lit. 
   Neil lived there. She  couldn’t remember  his last name, but he was a
part-time  bass-player  and  antiques   dealer  who  used  to  give  her
decorating advice  she  didn’t want  and also stole her milk  -- so  her
relationship with  him  had always remained at  a slightly frosty level.
Just  at the moment, though, she was praying that he was  there to  tell
her what was wrong with her  sofa, and  that his light would not  go out
as her  eyes wavered from the pavement in  front of her, with its  three
remaining pools of light spaced  evenly along the  way she had to tread.
   For  a moment  she  tried turning,  and  looked back the  way she had
come. All  was darkness,  shading off  into  the  blackness of  the park
which  no longer calmed but  menaced her, with hideously imagined thick,
knotted roots and treacherous, dark, rotting litter. 
   Again she turned, sweeping her eyes low. 
   Three pools of light. 
   The street  lights did not extinguish as she looked at  them, only as
she passed. 
   She squeezed her  eyes closed  and visualised exactly where the  lamp
of the next street light was, above and in front of her. She raised  her
head,  and carefully opened her  eyes again, staring directly  into  the
orange glow radiating through the thick glass. 
   It shone steadily. 
   With her eyes locked fast  on it  so that it burnt  squiggles on  her
retina, she  moved  cautiously  forward, step by step, exerting her will
on it to stay burning as she approached. It continued to glow. 
   She stepped forward  again. It continued to glow. Again  she stepped,
still  it glowed. Now she was  almost beneath  it, craning  her  neck to
keep it in focus. 
   She moved forward  once more, and  saw  the filament within the glass
flicker and quickly  die away, leaving an  after-image prancing madly in
her eyes. 
   She  dropped  her  eyes  now and  tried looking steadily forward, but
wild  shapes  were  leaping  everywhere  and she  felt  she  was  losing
control. The next  lamp  she  took a  lunging  run  towards,  and again,
sudden darkness  enveloped her arrival. She stopped  there  panting, and
blinking, trying to calm  herself again  and get her vision  sorted out.
Looking towards the  last  street  lamp,  she thought she saw  a  figure
standing  beneath  it. It  was  a large  form,  silhouetted with jumping
orange shadows. Huge horns stood upon the figure’s head. 
   She  stated  with  mad  intensity into the  billowing  darkness,  and
suddenly screamed at it, ‘Who are you?’ 
   There  was a pause,  and then  a  deep answering voice said,  ‘Do you
have anything that can get these bits of floorboard off my back?’ 
   
   
[::: CHAPTER 16 :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::]
   
   There was  another  pause, of  a different  and  slightly  disordered
quality. 
   It  was  a  long  one.  It  hung  there  nervously,  wondering  which
direction  it  was going to get broken from. The darkened street took on
a withdrawn, defensive aspect. 
   ‘What?’   Kate   screamed  back   at  the   figure,   at   last.   ‘I
said.../what/?’ 
   The great  figure stirred. Kate  still  could not  see  him  properly
because  her eyes were still dancing with  blue shadows, seared there by
the orange light. 
   ‘I was,’ said the figure, ‘glued to the floor. My father --’ 
   ‘Did  /you/...are  /you/...’ Kate quivered  with incoherent rage ‘are
you responsible...for all /this/?’  She  turned and  swept an angry hand
around the street to indicate the nightmare she had just traversed. 
   ‘It is important that you know who I am.’ 
   ‘Oh yeah?’ said  Kate. ‘Well let’s  get  the name down right now so I
can  take  it  straight to the  police and  get you  done for breach  of
something wilful or other. Intimidation. Interfering with --’ 
   ‘I am Thor. I am  the God of Thunder. The God of Rain. The God of the
High  Towering Clouds.  The  God of Lightning. The  God  of  the Flowing
Currents.  The God of  the  Particles.  The  God of the  Shaping and the
Binding Forces. The God  of the  Wind. The God of the Growing Crops. The
God of the Hammer Mjollnir.’ 
   ‘Are  you?’ simmered Kate. ‘Well, I’ve no doubt  that if you’d picked
a slack moment to mention all that, I might  have taken an interest, but
right now it just makes me very angry. Turn the damn lights on!’ 
   ‘I am --’ 
   ‘I said turn the lights on!’ 
   With something of  a  sheepish glow,  the streetlights all  came back
on,  and the windows  of the  houses all  quietly illuminated themselves
once more.  The lamp  above  Kate  popped again almost  immediately. She
shot him a warning look. 
   ‘It was an old light, and infirm,’ he said. 
   She simply continued to glare at him. 
   ‘See,’  he  said, ‘I  have your address.’  He held out  the  piece of
paper  she had given  him  at the airport,  as if that somehow explained
everything and put the world to rights. 
   ‘I --’ 
   ‘Back!’ he shouted, throwing up his arms in front of his face. 
   ‘What?’ 
   With a  huge rush  of wind a swooping  eagle dropped from out of  the
night sky,  with  its talons  outspread to catch  at him.  Thor beat and
thrashed  at it until the great  bird flailed backwards,  turned, nearly
crashed  to  the ground, recovered  itself, and with great slow beats of
its wings,  heaved itself back up through the  air and perched on top of
the street lamp. It  grasped the lamp hard with  its talons and steadied
itself, making the whole lamppost quiver very slightly in its grip. 
   ‘Go!’ shouted Thor at it. 
   The  eagle sat there  and peered  down at him.  A  monstrous creature
made  more  monstrous  by  the effect  of the  orange light on  which it
perched, casting  huge, flapping  shadows on  the nearby houses, it  had
strange  circular markings on its wings.  These were  markings that Kate
wondered  if she had  seen before, only in  a nightmare, but then again,
she was by no means certain that she was not in a nightmare now. 
   There was no doubt that she  had found  the  man she was looking for.
The same  huge form, the same glacial eyes, the  same look  of  arrogant
exasperation  and  slight  muddle, only  this time his feet were plunged
into  huge  hide  boots, great furs,  straps  and  thongs hung  from his
shoulders,  a  huge steel  horned helmet  stood on  his  head,  and  his
exasperation was directed  this time not at an airline check-in girl but
at a huge eagle perched on a lamppost in the middle of Primrose Hill. 
   ‘Go,’  he shouted  at it  again. ‘The matter is beyond my power!  All
that I can do I have done!  Your  family is provided  for.  You I can do
nothing more for! I myself am powerless and sick.’ 
   Kate was suddenly shocked to see that there  were great gouges on the
big man’s left forearm  where the eagle had got its talons into  him and
ripped  them  through his  skin. Blood was welling up  out of them  like
bread out of a baking tin. 
   ‘Go!’ he shouted again.  With the  edge  of one hand  he scraped  the
blood off his other arm and flung the  heavy drops at  the  eagle, which
reared  back, flapping,  but retained its hold. Suddenly  the man  leapt
high into  the air and  grappled  himself to  the  top of the  lamppost,
which  now  began to shake dangerously under their combined weight. With
loud  cries the  eagle pecked viciously at him while he tried with great
swings of his free arm to sweep it from its perch. 
   A door opened. It was the front door of Kate’s house  and a  man with
grey-rimmed  spectacles and  a neat  moustache looked  out. It was Neil,
Kate’s downstairs neighbour, in a mood. 
   ‘Look, I really  think  --’ he  started.  However, it  quickly became
clear  that he simply  didn’t  know what  to  think and  retreated  back
indoors, taking his mood, unsatisfied, with him. 
   The big  man braced  himself,  and with  a huge leap  hurled  himself
through  the air  and landed with a slight, controlled  wobble on top of
the  next  lamppost, which bent slightly under his weight.  He crouched,
glaring at the eagle, which glared back. 
   ‘Go!’ he shouted again, brandishing his arm at it. 
   ‘Gaarh!’ it screeched back at him. 
   With another swing of his arm he  pulled  from under his furs a great
short-handled sledge-hammer and  hefted  its  great weight  meaningfully
from  one hand  to  another. The  head of the  hammer was a roughly cast
piece of iron about the  size and shape of a pint of beer in a big glass
mug, and its shaft was a stocky, wrist-  thick piece of ancient oak with
leather strapping bound about its handle. 
   ‘Gaaarrrh!’  screeched the eagle again, but regarded the sledgehammer
with keen-eyed suspicion. As  Thor began slowly to swing the hammer, the
eagle shifted its  weight tensely from one leg to the  other, in time to
the rhythm of the swings. 
   ‘Go!’  said Thor  again, more,  quietly,  but with greater menace. He
rose to his  full height  on top of the lamppost,  and swung the  hammer
faster and  faster  in  a great  circle. Suddenly he hurled it  directly
towards  the  eagle.  In  the  same  instant  a  bolt  of  high  voltage
electricity erupted  from the  lamp  on  which the  eagle  was  sitting,
causing it  to  leap with  loud  cries wildly into  the air.  The hammer
sailed harmlessly  under the  lamp, swung  up into the  air and out over
the  darkness  of the park,  while Thor, released of its weight, wobbled
and  tottered  on top of his  lamppost,  spun  round  and  regained  his
balance. Flailing madly at the air with  its huge wings, the eagle, too,
regained  control  of itself, flew upwards, made  one last diving attack
on Thor, which the  god leapt backwards  off the lamppost  to avoid, and
then climbed up and away into the night sky in which  it quickly  became
a small, dark speck, and then at last was gone. 
   The  hammer  came  bounding back from out of the sky, scraped  flying
sparks from  the paving-stones with its  head, turned over twice in  the
air  and  then  dropped  its head back to  the  ground next  to Kate and
nested its shaft gently against her leg. 
   An elderly  lady who had  been  waiting patiently with her dog in the
shadows  beneath  the  street  lamp,  which  was  now  defunct,  sensed,
correctly,  that all  of  the  excitement  was  now  over and  proceeded
quietly past them. Thor waited  politely till  they had  passed and then
approached Kate,  who stood with her arms folded watching him. After all
the business of the last two or three  minutes he seemed suddenly not to
have the  faintest idea  what to  say and for the  moment  merely  gazed
thoughtfully into the middle distance. 
   Kate  formed the distinct  impression  that  thinking was, for him, a
separate activity from  everything else, a  task  that  needed  its  own
space.  It could  not easily  be  combined with other activities such as
walking or talking or buying airline tickets. 
   ‘We’d better take a look  at your  arm,’ she said, and led the way up
the steps to her house. He followed, docile. 
   As she opened the  front door she found  Neil in the hall leaning his
back against  the wall  and looking with grim pointedness at a Coca-Cola
vending machine  standing against  the  opposite wall  and  taking up an
inordinate amount of space in the hallway. 
   ‘I don’t know  what we’re going to do about this, I really don’t,’ he
said. 
   ‘What’s it doing there?’ asked Kate. 
   ‘Well, that’s what I’m asking you,  I’m  afraid,’ said Neil. ‘I don’t
know how you’re going to get it up the stairs.  Don’t see  how it can be
done to be perfectly frank with  you. And let’s  face it, I don’t  think
you’re going to like  it once  you’ve  got it up there. I know it’s very
modern  and American, but  think about it, you’ve got  that  nice French
cherrywood table, that sofa  which will be  very nice once you’ve  taken
off  that dreadful Collier Campbell  covering  like I keep on saying you
should, only you won’t listen, and  I just don’t see that it’s  going to
fit in, not  in either  sense. And I’m not even sure that I should allow
it, I mean it’s a very heavy object and  you  know what I’ve said to you
about  the floors in  this house. I’d  think again, I  really would, you
know.’ 
   ‘Yes, Neil, how did it get here?’ 
   ‘Well, your friend  here delivered it just an hour or so ago. I don’t
know where he’s been working out,  but I must say I wouldn’t mind paying
his  gym a visit. I said I thought the whole thing was very doubtful but
he would insist  and in the end I  even had to  give him  a hand. But  I
must say that I think we need  to  have a  very serious think about  the
whole topic. I  asked  your  friend  if  he liked Wagner  but  he didn’t
respond very well. So, I  don’t know, what do you want to  do about it?’
   Kate took  a  deep  breath. She suggested to her huge  guest  that he
carry on upstairs and  she would see him in just a moment. Thor lumbered
past, and was an absurd figure mounting the stairs. 
   Neil watched  Kate’s  eyes  very  closely  for  a  clue  as  to what,
exactly, was going on, but Kate was as blank as she knew how. 
   ‘I’m  sorry, Neil,’ she  said,  matter-of-factly.  ‘The  Coke machine
will  go.  It’s  all  a  misunderstanding. I’ll  get  this sorted out by
tomorrow.’ 
   ‘Yes,  that’s  all very  well,’  said  Neil, ‘but where does all this
leave me? I mean, you see my problem.’ 
   ‘No, Neil, I don’t.’ 
   ‘Well,  I’ve got  this...thing  out  here, you’ve  got  that...person
upstairs, and the whole thing is just a total disruption.’ 
   ‘Is there anything I can do to make anything any better?’ 
   ‘Well it’s not as  easy as that,  is it?  I mean, I  think you should
just think about it a  bit, that’s all. I mean, all  this. You  told  me
you were going away.  I heard the bath running this  afternoon. What was
I to think? And after you had  gone  on about  the cat, and you  know  I
won’t work with cats.’ 
   ‘I  know, Neil. That’s why  I asked Mrs Grey next door to look  after
her.’ 
   ‘Yes,  and  look what happened to her.  Died of a  heart  attack.  Mr
Grey’s very upset, you know.’ 
   ‘I don’t think it had anything  to do with me asking her if she would
look after my cat.’ 
   ‘Well, all I can say is that he’s /very/ upset.’ 
   ‘Yes, Neil. His wife’s died.’ 
   ‘Well, I’m not saying anything.  I’m just saying  I think  you should
think  about it. And what on earth are  we going to do  about all this?’
he added, re-addressing his attention to the Coca-Cola machine. 
   ‘I’ve  said  that I  will  make sure it’s gone in the morning, Neil,’
said Kate. ‘I’m quite happy to stand here  and scream very loudly if you
think it will help in any way, but --’ 
   ‘Listen,  love, I’m only  making the  point.  And  I hope you’re  not
going to be making a lot of noise up there because  I’ve got to practise
my music tonight, and you know  that  I need  quiet  to concentrate.’ He
gave Kate a meaningful look  over the top of his glasses and disappeared
into his flat. 
   Kate stood and silently  counted as  much of one to ten as  she could
currently remember and  then  headed staunchly up the stairs in the wake
of the God of Thunder,  feeling that she  was not in a  mood  for either
weather or theology. The house began  to throb and shake to the sound of
the main theme of /The  Ride of  the Valkyries/ being played on a Fender
Precision bass. 
   
   
[::: CHAPTER 17 :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::]
   
   As Dirk edged his way along the Euston  Road, caught in the middle of
a rush hour traffic jam that had started  in the late nineteen seventies
and which, at  a quarter to ten on  this Thursday evening, still  showed
no  signs  of  abating,  he  thought he  caught  sight  of  something he
recognised. 
   It  was his subconscious which told him this -- that infuriating part
of a person’s brain which never  responds to interrogation, merely gives
little  meaningful  nudges and  then  sits  humming  quietly  to itself,
saying nothing. 
   ‘Well  of course I’ve just seen something I recognise,’ Dirk muttered
mentally   to  his  subconscious.   ‘I   drive   along  this   benighted
thoroughfare twenty times  a month.  I expect I recognise  every  single
matchstick lying  in the gutter.  Can’t  you be a little more specific?’
His subconscious  would not  be  hectored though,  and was dumb.  It had
nothing further to add. The city  was probably full of grey vans anyway.
Very unremarkable. 
   ‘Where?’  muttered Dirk  to himself fiercely, twisting round  in  his
seat this way and that. ‘Where did I see a grey van?’ 
   Nothing. 
   He was  thoroughly hemmed in by the traffic  and could not  manoeuvre
in any  direction, least of all  forward. He  erupted  from  his car and
started to jostle  his way  back through the jammed cars  bobbing up and
down to try and see where, if  anywhere,  he might have caught a glimpse
of a grey van. If he  had seen one,  it eluded him now. His subconscious
sat and said nothing. 
   The  traffic was  still  not moving, so  he  tried  to thread his way
further  back,  but was obstructed by  a large motorcycle courier edging
his way  forward on  a huge grimy  Kawasaki. Dirk  engaged  in  a  brief
altercation  with  the courier,  but lost it  because  the  courier  was
unable  to  hear  Dirk’s  side  of   the  altercation;  eventually  Dirk
retreated  through the tide of traffic which now was beginning slowly to
move  in  all lanes other than the one in which his car sat, driverless,
immobile and hooted at. 
   He felt  suddenly elated by the braying of the motor horns, and as he
swayed and bobbed his way back through the  snarled  up columns of cars,
he suddenly found that  he reminded  himself of the crazies he had  seen
on the  streets  of  New  York, who would career  out into  the road  to
explain to the  oncoming  traffic about the  Day  of Judgement, imminent
alien invasions and  incompetence and corruption in the Pentagon. He put
his  hands  above  his  head and  started to shout  out, ‘The  Gods  are
walking the Earth! The Gods are walking the Earth!’ 
   This further inflamed  the feelings of  those who  were beeping their
horns at  his  stationary  car, and  quickly  the whole rose  through  a
crescendo  of majestic cacophony, with Dirk’s  voice ringing  out  above
it. 
   ‘The Gods are walking the Earth! The Gods are walking the  Earth!’ he
hollered.  ‘The Gods  are walking the Earth! Thank you!’  he  added, and
ducked  down  into his car,  put it into Drive and pulled away, allowing
the whole jammed mass at last to seethe easily forward. 
   He wondered  why he was so sure.  An ‘Act of  God’. Merely a  chance,
careless phrase  by which people were able  to  dispose  conveniently of
awkward  phenomena that would admit of no more rational explanation. But
it  was  the chance carelessness  of  it which  particularly appealed to
Dirk  because words used  carelessly, as if  they did  not matter in any
serious  way,  often  allowed  otherwise  well-guarded  truths  to  seep
through. 
   An inexplicable  disappearance.  Oslo  and  a  hammer:  a  tiny, tiny
coincidence  which  struck a  tiny, tiny  note.  However, it  was a note
which sang in the  midst  of the daily hubbub  of white noise, and other
tiny notes were  singing at the  same pitch. An Act of God, Oslo,  and a
hammer.  A  man  with a  hammer, trying to go to  Norway,  is prevented,
loses his temper, and as a result there is an ‘Act of God’. 
   If, thought Dirk, if  a being were immortal he  would still  be alive
today. That, quite simply, was what ‘immortal’ meant. 
   How would an immortal being have a passport? 
   Quite simply,  how? Dirk tried to imagine what might happen if  -- to
pick a  name  quite at  random  --  the  God Thor, he of  the  Norwegian
ancestry and  the  great hammer, were  to arrive  at the passport office
and try to  explain who he was and how come he had no birth certificate.
There  would   be   no  shock,  no  horror,  no   loud  exclamations  of
astonishment, just blank,  bureaucratic  impossibility. It wouldn’t be a
matter of  whether anybody believed him or  not, it  would  simply be  a
question of producing  a valid birth  certificate. He could stand  there
wreaking miracles all day if he liked  but at  close  of business, if he
didn’t  have  a  valid birth  certificate, he  would  simply be asked to
leave. 
   And credit cards. 
   If, to sustain for  a moment the same arbitrary hypothesis,  the  God
Thor were alive  and for some reason  at large in England, then he would
probably  be the only person  in the country  who did  not  receive  the
constant barrage of invitations to  apply for an American Express  card,
crude  threats  by the  same  post to take their  American Express cards
away,  and  gift  catalogues  full  of  sumptuously  unpleasant  things,
lavishly tooled in naff brown plastic. 
   Dirk found the idea quite breathtaking. 
   That is, if he were the only god at large -- which,  once you were to
accept  the first extravagant  hypothesis,  was hardly likely to be  the
case. 
   But imagine for  a  moment  such  a  person attempting  to  leave the
country, armed  with no passport,  no credit cards, merely the  power to
throw thunderbolts and  who  knew what else. You  would probably have to
imagine a scene  very  similar  to the  one  that did  in fact occur  at
Terminal Two, Heathrow. 
   But why, if you were  a Norse god, would you  be needing to leave the
country by means of a scheduled airline? Surely there were  other means?
Dirk rather thought that  one of  the perks of being an immortal  divine
might  be  the  ability to  fly  under  your  own  power.  From  what he
remembered of his reading of the Norse legends many years ago, the  gods
were continually flying  all  over the  place  and  there was  never any
mention of them hanging around in departure lounges eating crummy  buns.
Admittedly, the  world  was  not, in  those days,  bristling  with  air-
traffic  controllers,  radar,  missile  warning  systems and  such like.
Still,  a  quick hop across the  North Sea shouldn’t  be  that much of a
problem for a  god,  particularly if  the  weather was  in  your favour,
which, if you were the God of Thunder,  you  would pretty much expect it
to be, or want to know the reason why. Should it? 
   Another  tiny note sang in the back of Dirk’s mind and  then was lost
in the hubbub. 
   He wondered for a moment what  it was like to be a whale. Physically,
he  thought,  he  was  probably well  placed to  get some good insights,
though  whales were better  adapted for their  lives of gliding about in
the vast pelagic blueness than he was  for his  of struggling up through
the Pentonville Road traffic  in a weary  old Jaguar -- but what  he was
thinking of, in fact, was the whales’ songs. In the  past the whales had
been  able to  sing  to each  other  across whole  oceans, even from one
ocean to another  because sound  travels such huge distances underwater.
But now, again because  of the way in  which  sound travels, there is no
part of  the  ocean that is not constantly jangling with the  hubbub  of
ships’  motors, through  which  it  is now virtually impossible for  the
whales to hear each other’s songs or messages. 
   So  fucking  what,  is pretty  much the  way that people tend to view
this problem,  and understandably so, thought Dirk. After all, who wants
to hear  a bunch  of fat  fish,  oh all  right, mammals, burping at each
other? 
   But  for a moment Dirk  had a sense of infinite loss and sadness that
somewhere amongst  the  frenzy  of information  noise that daily rattled
the lives of  men he thought  he  might  have  heard a  few  notes  that
denoted the movements of gods. 
   As he  turned north  into Islington and began the  long  haul up past
the pizza restaurants and estate agents, he  felt  almost frantic at the
idea of what their lives must now be like. 
   
   
[::: CHAPTER 18 :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::]
   
   Thin fingers  of lightning  spread  out across the heavy underside of
the great  clouds which hung from  the  sky  like a  sagging  stomach. A
small crack of fretful  thunder  nagged  at it and dragged from it a few
mean drops of greasy drizzle. 
   Beneath the  sky ranged  a  vast assortment  of wild turrets, gnarled
spires and  pinnacles which prodded at it, goaded  and  inflamed it till
it  seemed it  would  burst  and  drown  them  in  a flood of  festering
horrors. 
   High  in the flickering darkness,  silent  figures stood guard behind
long shields, dragons crouched gaping at  the foul  sky as Odin,  father
of  the Gods  of Asgard, approached the great iron portals through which
led  to his domain  and on into the vaulted halls  of Valhalla. The  air
was full of  the  noiseless howls of great winged dogs, welcoming  their
master  to the seat of his rule. Lightning searched among the towers and
turrets. 
   The great, ancient and immortal God of  Asgard  was returning to  the
current  site  of his domain in a manner that would have surprised  even
him centuries ago  in the years of the prime of his life -- for even the
immortal gods have  their primes, when their powers are rampant and they
both  nourish and hold sway over the world of men, the world whose needs
give them birth -- he was returning  in a  large, unmarked grey Mercedes
van. 
   The van drew to a halt in a secluded area. 
   The  cab  door opened and  there climbed  down from it  a dull, slow-
faced man in  an  unmarked grey uniform.  He was  a man who  was charged
with the work  he did in life because he was not one to ask questions --
not so much on account of any  natural  quality of discretion as because
he  simply could  never  think  of any  questions to ask.  Moving with a
slow,  rolling  gait,  like a paddle being  pulled through  porridge, he
made his way to the  rear  of the van and  opened the rear  doors --  an
elaborate  procedure  involving  the  co-ordinated manipulation of  many
sliders and levers. 
   At length the doors  swung  open, and  if Kate  had been present  she
might for  a moment have been jolted by the thought that perhaps the van
was carrying Albanian  electricity after  all. A  haze of  light greeted
Hillow  --  the man’s name was Hillow  -- but nothing about  this struck
him as odd. A  haze of light was simply what he expected to see whenever
he  opened this door. The first time ever he had opened it he had simply
thought to  himself, ‘Oh. A  haze of light.  Oh  well,’ and more or less
left it  at that,  on the  strength  of which he  had guaranteed himself
regular employment for as long as he cared to live. 
   The haze of light subsided and  coalesced into the  shape  of an old,
old man  in a trolley bed attended by a short little figure whom  Hillow
would  probably  have thought  was  the most evil-looking person he  had
ever  seen  if  he had had a mind to recall the other people he had seen
in  his life and run through them all one by one, making the comparison.
That, however, was harder  than  Hillow wished to work. His only concern
at present  was to assist the small figure with the decanting of the old
man’s bed on to ground level. 
   This was  fluently  achieved. The  legs and wheels of the bed  were a
miracle   of  smoothly  operating   stainless  steel  technology.   They
unlocked, rolled,  swivelled, in elaborately interlocked movements which
made the negotiating  of steps  or bumps  all part  of the  same  fluid,
gliding motion. 
   To  the  right  of this area  lay  a large  ante-chamber  panelled in
finely  carved wood with  great  marble torch  holders  standing proudly
from the walls. This  in turn led into the great vaulted hall itself. To
the  left, however,  lay the entrance  to  the  majestic  inner chambers
where Odin would go to prepare himself for  the encounters of the night.
   He hated all  this. Hounded  from  his bed, he muttered  to  himself,
though in  truth he was bringing  his bed with  him. Made to listen once
again  to  all kinds of self  indulgent  clap-trap from his  bone-headed
thunderous son  who  would  not accept, could not accept, simply did not
have the  intelligence to accept the new realities  of life. If he would
not accept  them  then he must be extinguished, and tonight Asgard would
see  the  extinction  of  an  immortal god.  It  was  all,  thought Odin
fractiously,  too much for  someone at  his  time  of  life,  which  was
extremely advanced, but not in any particular direction. 
   He  wanted  merely  to stay  in  his hospital,  which  he  loved. The
arrangement  which had brought  him to  that place was  of  the sweetest
kind and though it was not without its cost,  it  was a cost that simply
had  to  be  borne and  that was  all there  was  to it.  There were new
realities, and he  had learned to embrace them.  Those who did not would
simply have  to  suffer the consequences. Nothing came of  nothing, even
for a god. 
   After  tonight   he  could  return  to  his  life  in  the  Woodshead
indefinitely, and that would be good. He said as much to Hillow. 
   ‘Clean white sheets,’  he said to Hillow, who merely nodded, blankly.
‘Linen sheets. Every day, clean sheets.’ 
   Hillow manoeuvred the bed around and up a step. 
   ‘Being  a god, Hillow,’  continued Odin,  ‘being a god, well,  it was
unclean, you hear  what  I’m saying? There  was no one who took care  of
the sheets. I mean really  took care of them. Would you think that? In a
situation like mine? Father  of the Gods?  There was no  one, absolutely
no one, who came in and said, “Mr Odwin,”’ --  he chuckled to himself --
‘they call  me Mr Odwin  there,  you  know.  They  don’t quite  know who
they’re  dealing with. I don’t  think  they  could handle  it,  do  you,
Hillow? But there was no one  in all that time who came in and said, “Mr
Odwin, I have  changed your bed and  you  have  clean sheets.”  No  one.
There was constant talk about  hewing  things and  ravaging  things  and
splitting  things asunder.  Lots of big talk of things being mighty, and
of things being  riven, and of  things being in thrall to  other things,
but very little attention given, as I now realise, to the  laundry.  Let
me give you an example...’ 
   His reminiscences  were  for a moment  interrupted,  however, by  the
arrival of his  vehicle at a great doorway which was guarded  by a great
sweaty  splodge  of  a being  who stood  swaying, arms akimbo,  in their
path. Toe Rag,  who had been preserving an intense silence as he stalked
along just ahead of  the bed,  hurried forward and had a quick word with
the  sweating creature,  who had  to bend, red-faced, to hear  him. Then
instantly   the   sweaty   creature   shrank    back   with   glistening
obsequiousness  into  its yellow lair,  and  the sacred  trolley  rolled
forward  into  the great halls,  chambers and corridors from which great
gusty echoes roared and fetid odours blew. 
   ‘Let me  give  you an  example, Hillow,’  continued Odin.  ‘Take this
place for example. Take Valhalla...’ 
   
   
[::: CHAPTER 19 :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::]
   
   Turning  north  was a  manoeuvre which  normally  had  the  effect of
restoring a sense of  reason  and  sanity to things, but Dirk  could not
escape a sense of foreboding. 
   Furthermore it  came on  to rain a little, which should have  helped,
but it  was such  mean and  wretched rain  to come from such a heavy sky
that  it only increased  the sense  of  claustrophobia  and  frustration
which gripped the night. Dirk turned  on the car  wipers which  grumbled
because they didn’t have  quite enough rain  to  wipe away, so he turned
them off again. Rain quickly speckled the windscreen. 
   He turned  on the  wipers again, but they  still refused to feel that
the exercise  was worthwhile,  and scraped and squeaked in  protest. The
streets turned treacherously slippery. 
   Dirk  shook his head. He was  being quite absurd, he told himself, in
the worst possible  way. He had allowed himself to become fanciful  in a
manner  that  he  quite  despised.  He  astounded  himself  at the  wild
fantasies he had built on  the flimsiest amount of, well he would hardly
call it evidence, mere conjecture. 
   An accident at an airport. Probably a simple explanation. 
   A man with a hammer. So what? 
   A grey  van which Kate  Schechter  had seen at  the hospital. Nothing
unusual about that.  Dirk  had nearly collided with it,  but again, that
was a perfectly commonplace occurrence. 
   A Coca-Cola machine: he hadn’t taken that into account. 
   Where  did a  Coca-Cola  machine fit into these  wild  notions  about
ancient gods? The  only idea he had about that was simply too ridiculous
for words and he refused even to acknowledge it to himself. 
   At that  point Dirk found himself driving past  the house where, that
very  morning,  he  had  encountered  a  client  of his  who had had his
severed  head placed  on  a  revolving record turntable by  a green-eyed
devil-figure waving a scythe and a blood-signed  contract who  had  then
vanished into thin air. 
   He peered at it as he passed, and when a large  dark-blue BMW  pulled
out from the kerb just ahead  of  him he  ran  straight into the back of
it,  and for  the second time  that day he had to leap  out  of his car,
already shouting. 
   ‘For  God’s sake can’t you look where you’re going?’ he exclaimed, in
the hope of bagging his adversary’s best  lines from the outset. ‘Stupid
people!’ he continued, without pausing for breath.  ‘Careering  all over
the place.  Driving  without due care  and attention! Reckless assault!’
Confuse your enemy, he  thought.  It  was a little like phoning somebody
up, and saying ‘Yes?  Hello?’ in a testy voice when they answered, which
was  one  of Dirk’s favourite methods  of whiling away  long, hot summer
afternoons. He bent down  and examined the palpable  dent in the rear of
the BMW, which was quite obviously, damn  it, a brand new one. Blast and
bugger it, thought Dirk. 
   ‘Look  what you’ve done to my  bumper!’  he cried. ‘I hope you have a
good lawyer!’ 
   ‘I  am a good lawyer,’ said a  quiet voice which  was followed  by  a
quiet click. Dirk looked  up in momentary apprehension. The  quiet click
was only the sound of the car door closing. 
   The man  was wearing an  Italian  suit, which  was also quiet. He had
quiet  glasses, quietly  cut  hair, and though  a bow-tie is not, by its
very  nature,  a  quiet  object, the  particular  bow-tie  he  wore was,
nevertheless,  a very  quietly spotted example  of the  genre. He drew a
slim  wallet from his  pocket  and also a slim  silver pencil. He walked
without  fuss  to the  rear  of  Dirk’s Jaguar and made  a  note  of the
registration number. 
   ‘Do you have a card?’ he enquired as he did  so, without  looking up.
‘Here’s mine,’ he added, taking one from  his wallet. He made a  note on
the back of  it. ‘My registration number,’ he said, ‘and the  name of my
insurance  company. Perhaps you would be good enough to let me have  the
name of yours. If you don’t have it  with you, I’ll got my  girl to call
you.’ 
   Dirk  sighed, and decided there was no point in putting up a fight on
this one.  He  fished out  his  wallet  and  leafed through  the various
business  cards that  seemed to accumulate in it as  if from nowhere. He
toyed for a second with the idea of being Wesley Arlott, an  ocean-going
yacht  navigation  consultant   from,  apparently,  Arkansas,  but  then
thought  better  of it. The  man had,  after all, taken his registration
number, and  although Dirk had  no particular recollection of paying  an
insurance premium of late,  he  also had  no  particular recollection of
not paying one either, which was a reasonably promising sign.  He handed
over a bona- fide card with a wince. The man looked at it. 
   ‘Mr Gently,’  he  said.  ‘Private  investigator. I’m  sorry,  private
/holistic/ investigator. OK.’ 
   He put the card away, taking no further interest. 
   Dirk had never felt so patronised  in his life. At that moment  there
was another quiet  click from  the other side  of  the car.  Dirk looked
across to  see  a woman  with red spectacles standing there giving him a
frozen half  smile. She was the woman he had spoken  with over  Geoffrey
Anstey’s  garden  wall  this  morning,  and   the  man,  Dirk  therefore
supposed, was probably her husband. He wondered  for a second whether he
should  wrestle  them  to the ground  and question them  rigorously  and
violently, but he was suddenly feeling immensely tired and run down. 
   He   acknowledged  the   woman  in  red  spectacles  with  a   minute
inclination of his head. 
   ‘All done, Cynthia,’  said the  man and flicked a smile on and off at
her. ‘It’s all taken care of.’ 
   She nodded faintly,  and the two of them climbed  back into their BMW
and after a moment or two  pulled away without fuss and disappeared away
down the road. Dirk  looked at the  card in his hand. Clive Draycott. He
was with  a good  firm of City solicitors. Dirk  stuck the  card away in
his  wallet, climbed despondently back into his car, and  drove  on back
to his  house,  where he found a large golden eagle sitting patiently on
his doorstep. 
   
   
[::: CHAPTER 20 :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::]
   
   Kate rounded on her guest  as soon as they were  both inside her flat
with the  door closed  and Kate  could be  reasonably  certain that Neil
wasn’t  going to sneak back out of his flat and lurk disapprovingly half
way up the stairs.  The continuing thumping of his bass was at least her
guarantee of privacy. 
   ‘All  right,’ she said fiercely, ‘so what is the  deal with the eagle
then? What is the deal with all the street lights? Huh?’ 
   The Norse God  of Thunder  looked at  her awkwardly. He had to remove
his great  horned helmet because it  was banging against the ceiling and
leaving scratch marks in the plaster. He tucked it under his arm. 
   ‘What is the  deal,’  continued  Kate,  ‘with  the Coca-Cola machine?
What is  the deal with the  hammer? What,  in  short,  is the big  deal?
Huh?’ 
   Thor  said  nothing. He frowned for a second in arrogant  irritation,
then  frowned in  something that looked somewhat like embarrassment, and
then simply stood there and bled at her. 
   For a  few seconds she  resisted the  impending  internal collapse of
her  attitude, and then realised it was just going to go  to hell anyway
so she might as well go with it. 
   ‘OK,’ she muttered, ‘let’s  get all  that cleaned  up. I’ll find some
antiseptic.’ 
   She went  to  rummage in  the  kitchen cupboard  and returned  with a
bottle to find Thor saying ‘No’ at her. 
   ‘No what?’ she said crossly,  putting the  bottle down  on  the table
with a bit of a bang. 
   ‘That,’ said Thor, and pushed the bottle back at her. ‘No.’ 
   ‘What’s the matter with it?’ 
   Thor  just shrugged and stared moodily at a corner of the room. There
was  nothing  that  could be  considered  remotely  interesting  in that
corner  of the  room,  so  he was clearly  looking  at  it  out of sheer
bloody-mindedness. 
   ‘Look, buster,’ said Kate, ‘if I can call you buster, what --’ 
   ‘Thor,’ said Thor, ‘God of --’ 
   ‘Yes,’ said Kate, ‘you’ve told  me all the things you’re God  of. I’m
trying to clean up your arm.’ 
   ‘Sedra,’ said  Thor, holding his bleeding arm out, but away from her.
He peered at it anxiously. 
   ‘What?’ 
   ‘Crushed  leaves of sedra. Oil of the kernel of the apricot. Infusion
of bitter orange blossom.  Oil of almonds. Sage and comfrey.  Not this.’
   He pushed the bottle  of antiseptic off  the table  and  sank into  a
mood. 
   ‘Right!’ said Kate, picked up  the bottle  and  hurled it at him.  It
rebounded off his  cheekbone  leaving  an instant red  mark. Thor lunged
forward  in  a  rage, but Kate  simply stood  her ground  with  a finger
pointed at him. 
   ‘You stay right there,  buster!’ she said, and  he stopped. ‘Anything
special you need for that?’ 
   Thor looked puzzled for a moment. 
   ‘That!’ said Kate, pointing at the blossoming bruise on his cheek. 
   ‘Vengeance,’ said Thor. 
   ‘I’ll have to see what I can do,’ said Kate.  She  turned on her heel
and stalked out of the room. 
   After  about  two  minutes of  unseen  activity  Kate returned to the
room, trailed by wisps of steam. 
   ‘All right,’ she said, ‘come with me.’ 
   She led him into  her  bathroom. He followed her with a great show of
reluctance,  but  he followed  her. Kate had  been  trailed by wisps  of
steam  because  the  bathroom  was  full  of it.  The  bath  itself  was
overflowing with bubbles and gunk. 
   There were  some bottles and  pots, mostly  empty,  lined  up along a
small  shelf  above  the  bath.  Kate picked them  up  one  by  one  and
displayed them at him. 
   ‘Apricot  kernel  oil,’  she  said,  and  turned  it upside  down  to
emphasise its  emptiness.  ‘All in there,’  she added,  pointing at  the
foaming bath. 
   ‘Neroli oil,’ she said, picking  up the next one, ‘distilled from the
blossom of bitter oranges. All in there.’ 
   She  picked up  the next one. ‘Orange cream bath oil. Contains almond
oil. All in there.’ 
   She picked up the pots. 
   ‘Sage and comfrey,’ she said of one, ‘and sedra  oil. One of them’s a
hand cream and the other’s hair conditioner, but  they’re all in  there,
along with a tube of Aloe  Lip Preserver,  some Cucumber Cleansing Milk,
Honeyed  Beeswax  and  Jojoba Oil Cleanser,  Rhassoul Mud,  Seaweed  and
Birch Shampoo, Rich Night  Cream with Vitamin  E,  and a very great deal
of cod liver oil. I’m afraid I haven’t  got anything called “Vengeance”,
but here’s some Calvin Klein “Obsession”.’ 
   She took the stopper from a bottle  of perfume  and threw the  bottle
in the bath.
   ‘I’ll be in the next room when you’re done.’
   With that she marched  out, and slammed the door  on him.  She waited
in the other room, firmly reading a book. 
   
   
[::: CHAPTER 21 :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::]
   
   For about a minute Dirk remained sitting motionless in  his car a few
yards  away from his front door. He wondered what  his next move  should
be. A small,  cautious one, he rather thought. The last  thing he wanted
to have to contend with at the moment was a startled eagle. 
   He watched  it intently. It  stood  there with  a  pert  magnificence
about its  bearing, its  talons  gripped  tightly round  the edge of the
stone step. From time  to  time  it  preened  itself,  and  then  peered
sharply up the  street and down the  street, dragging  one of its  great
talons  across the  stone  in a deeply worrying manner. Dirk admired the
creature greatly for its size and its plumage and  its general  sense of
extreme air-worthiness,  but, asking himself if  he  liked the way  that
the light from  the street lamp  glinted in its  great glassy eye or  on
the huge hook of its beak, he had to admit that he did not. 
   The beak was a major piece of armoury. 
   It was a  beak that would frighten any animal on earth, even one that
was already dead and in a tin. Its talons looked  as if  they could  rip
up  a  small  Volvo. And it  was  sitting  waiting  on  Dirk’s doorstep,
looking up  and down the street with a gaze that  was at once meaningful
and mean. 
   Dirk  wondered if he  should simply drive  off and leave the country.
Did he  have his passport?  No. It was at home. It  was  behind the door
which  was behind  the eagle, in  a  drawer  somewhere  or, more likely,
lost. 
   He could sell up. The ratio of  estate agents to actual houses in the
area was rapidly  approaching parity. One  of  their lot could come  and
deal with  the  house. He’d had  enough of it, with its fridges  and its
wildlife  and  its  ineradicable  position  on the mailing  lists of the
American Express company. 
   Or  he could, he supposed with a slight shiver, just go  and see what
it  was  the  eagle  wanted. There was  a thought. Rats, probably, or  a
small  whippet. All Dirk  had, to his knowledge, was some  Rice Krispies
and  an  old   muffin,  and  he  didn’t  see  those  appealing  to  this
magisterial  creature of the  air. He  rather fancied that he could make
out  fresh blood congealing  on the  bird’s  talons, but he told himself
firmly not to be so ridiculous. 
   He was  just going  to have to go and face up  to the  thing, explain
that he was fresh out of rats and take the consequences. 
   Quietly, infinitely quietly, he pushed open  the door of his car, and
stole out of it, keeping his head down.  He peered  at it from  over the
bonnet of the  car. It hadn’t moved. That is to say, it hadn’t left  the
district. It  was still  looking this  way  and that around itself with,
possibly, a  heightened sense of  alertness.  Dirk didn’t  know  in what
remote mountain  eyrie the creature  had learnt  to  listen  out for the
sound  of Jaguar  car door hinges revolving in  their  sockets,  but the
sound had clearly not escaped its attention. 
   Cautiously, Dirk  bobbed  along  behind  the  line  of  cars that had
prevented  him from being able to park  directly outside his  own house.
In a couple  of seconds all that separated him  from  the  extraordinary
creature was a small, blue Renault. 
   What next? 
   He could simply stand up and, as it  were, declare himself.  He would
be saying, in effect, ‘Here I am,  do  what  you  will.’  Whatever  then
transpired, the Renault could probably bear the brunt. 
   There  was always the possibility, of course, that the eagle would be
pleased to see him, that all this swooping it had been directing at  him
had  been just its way of being matey. Assuming, of course,  that it was
the same eagle. That was not such an enormous assumption. The  number of
golden  eagles  at large  in North  London  at  any one  time  was, Dirk
guessed, fairly small. 
   Or maybe it was  just nesting on his doorstep completely  by  chance,
enjoying  a quick breather  prior to having another  hurtle through  the
sky in pursuit  of  whatever it  is that eagles  hurtle through the  sky
after. 
   Whatever the  explanation, now, Dirk realised, was  the time that  he
had simply to  take  his chances. He steeled himself, took a deep breath
and arose  from behind the Renault, like a  spirit rising from the deep.
   The eagle was looking in  another direction at the time, and it was a
second or  so before it looked back to the front  and  saw him, at which
point it reacted with  a loud screech and stepped back an inch or two, a
reaction which Dirk  felt a little put out by. It then blinked rapidly a
few  times and adopted a sort of  perky expression of which Dirk did not
have the faintest idea what to make. 
   He waited  for a  second  or  two,  until he felt  the situation  had
settled down  again after all the foregoing excitement, and then stopped
forward tentatively, round the  front of the Renault. A number of quiet,
interrogative  cawing  noises seemed  to float uncertainly  through  the
air, and then  after  a moment  Dirk  realised that he  was making  them
himself  and made  himself stop. This was an eagle he was  dealing with,
not a budgie. 
   It was at this point that he made his mistake. 
   With  his mind entirely taken up with eagles, the possible intentions
of  eagles,  and the many  ways in  which  eagles might be considered to
differ from small  kittens, he did not concentrate enough on what he was
doing as he stepped up  out of  the road  and on  to a pavement that was
slick with the recent  drizzle. As he brought  his rear foot forward  it
caught on the bumper of the car he  wobbled, slipped, and then did  that
thing  which one should never  do to a large eagle of uncertain  temper,
which was to fling himself headlong at it with his arms outstretched. 
   The eagle reacted instantly. 
   Without a second’s  hesitation it hopped  neatly  aside  and  allowed
Dirk the space he needed to collapse heavily on to his own  doorstep. It
then  peered down at him with a scorn that would  have withered a lesser
man, or at least a man that had been looking up at that moment. 
   Dirk groaned. 
   He  had sustained a blow to the temple from the edge of the step, and
it was a blow, he  felt, that he could just as easily  have done without
this evening.  He  lay there gasping for  a  second or two, then at last
rolled over heavily, clasping  one  hand to his  forehead, the  other to
his  nose, and  looked up  at the great bird in apprehension, reflecting
bitterly on the conditions under which he was expected to work. 
   When it became  clear  to him that he appeared for the moment to have
nothing  to fear from the eagle, who  was  merely  regarding  him with a
kind  of quizzical,  blinking  doubt, he sat up, and then slowly dragged
himself back to his feet and wiped and smacked some of the  dirt off his
coat. Then  he hunted through his pockets for his keys and unlocked  the
front door, which  seemed a  little  loose.  He waited to  see  what the
eagle would do next. 
   With a slight rustle of its wings it hopped over the lintel and  into
his hall. It  looked  around itself,  and  seemed to regard  what it saw
with a  little  distaste.  Dirk  didn’t know  what  it was  that  eagles
expected of people’s  hallways,  but had to  admit  to  himself that  it
wasn’t only  the eagle  which reacted  like that.  The disorder was  not
that great, but there was a grimness  to it which tended to  cast a pall
over visitors, and the eagle was clearly not immune to this effect. 
   Dirk  picked up  a  large flat  envelope lying on his doormat, looked
inside it to check that it was what  he had been expecting, then noticed
that  a  picture was  missing from  the wall. It  wasn’t a  particularly
wonderful picture,  merely a small  Japanese print that he had  found in
Camden Passage  and quite liked, but the  point was that it was missing.
The hook on the  wall was empty. There was a chair missing  as  well, he
realised. 
   The  possible  significance  of  this suddenly  struck  him,  and  he
hurried through to the kitchen. Many of his assorted  kitchen implements
had clearly gone. The rack of largely  unused Sabatier knives,  the food
processor  and his  radio cassette player had all vanished,  but he did,
however, have  a new fridge. It had obviously  been  delivered  by Nobby
Paxton’s  felonious thugs  and  he would  just have  to make  the  usual
little list. 
   Still, he  had a new fridge and that  was a considerable load off his
mind.  Already the  whole atmosphere in the kitchen  seemed  easier. The
tension had lifted. There was a  new  sense of lightness and springiness
in the air which had even communicated itself to the pile of  old  pizza
boxes which seemed now to  recline at a jaunty rather than an oppressive
angle. 
   Dirk cheerfully threw  open  the  door  to  the  new  fridge  and was
delighted  to find  it  completely  and utterly  empty.  Its inner light
shone on perfectly  clean blue and  white walls  and  on gleaming chrome
shelves.  He liked it so much that he  instantly  determined to keep  it
like  that. He would put  nothing in it at all. His food would just have
to go off in plain view. 
   Good. He closed it again. 
   A   screech  and  a   flap  behind  him  reminded  him  that  he  was
entertaining a visiting  eagle. He turned to find it glaring at him from
on top of the kitchen table. 
   Now that he was  getting a little  more accustomed to it, and had not
actually been viciously  attacked  as he  had suspected he might  be, it
seemed a little less  fearsome  than it had  at  first. It  was  still a
serious amount  of eagle, but  perhaps  an  eagle  was  a slightly  more
manageable  proposition than  he had  originally supposed. He  relaxed a
little and took off  his hat, pulled off his coat,  and threw them on to
a chair. 
   The  eagle  seemed  at  this juncture  to  sense  that Dirk might  be
getting  the wrong  idea  about  it  and flexed one of its claws at him.
With  sudden alarm Dirk  saw  that  it  did  indeed have  something that
closely  resembled congealed blood on the talons. He backed away from it
hurriedly.  The eagle then rose  up to its full height on its talons and
began to spread its great wings out, wider and wider,  beating them very
slowly and leaning forward so as to keep its balance. Dirk did  the only
thing he could think to do under the cincumstances and  bolted from  the
room,  slamming  the door  behind  him and  jamming  the  hall table  up
against it. 
   A  terrible cacophony  of  screeching  and scratching  and  buffeting
arose  instantly  from behind  it. Dirk  sat  leaning back  against  the
table, panting and trying to catch  his breath,  and then  after a while
began to get a worrying feeling about what the bird was up to now. 
   It  seemed  to him that  the  eagle  was actually dive-bombing itself
against the door. Every few  seconds  the pattern would repeat itself --
first a  great beating of wings, then a  rush, then a  terrible cracking
thud. Dirk  didn’t think it would  get through the door, but was alarmed
that  it might  beat  itself to death trying.  The creature seemed to be
quite  frantic  about something, but what, Dirk could not even  begin to
imagine. He tried to  calm himself down and  think clearly, to work  out
what he should do next. 
   He should phone Kate and make certain she was all right. 
   /Whoosh, thud!/ 
   He should finally open up  the envelope he had been carrying with him
all day and examine its contents. 
   /Whoosh, thud!/ 
   For that he would need a sharp knife. 
   /Whoosh, thud!/ 
   Three  rather  awkward  thoughts then  struck  him  in  fairly  quick
succession. 
   /Whoosh, thud!/ 
   First, the only sharp knives in the place,  assuming Nobby’s  removal
people had left him with any at all, were in the kitchen. 
   /Whoosh, thud!/ 
   That didn’t  matter so much in itself, because he could probably find
something in the house that would do. 
   /Whoosh, thud!/ 
   The second  thought was  that the actual  envelope itself was  in the
pocket of his coat which he  had left lying over the back of a  chair in
the kitchen. 
   /Whoosh, thud!/ 
   The third thought was  very similar to the second and had to do  with
the location of  the piece of paper with  Kate’s telephone number on it.
   /Whoosh, thud!/ 
   Oh God. 
   /Whoosh, thud!/ 
   Dirk  began to feel very,  very tired at  the way the day was working
out.  He was  deeply worried by the sense of impending calamity, but was
still by no means able to divine what lay at the root of it. 
   /Whoosh, thud!/ 
   Well, he knew what he had to do now... 
   /Whoosh, thud!/ 
   ...so  there  was  no point in not  getting  on with  it.  He quietly
pulled the table away from the door. 
   /Whoosh --/
   He  ducked and yanked the door open, passing smoothly under the eagle
as it  hurtled  out into  the  hallway  and  hit the opposite  wall.  He
slammed the door  closed  behind him from inside the kitchen, pulled his
coat off the chair and jammed the chair back up under the handle. 
   /Whoosh, thud!/ 
   The  damage done to the door  on this side was both  considerable and
impressive, and Dirk began  seriously to worry about what this behaviour
said about the  bird’s  state of  mind, or what the bird’s state of mind
might become if it maintained this behaviour for very much longer. 
   /Whoosh...scratch.../ 
   The same  thought seemed to have occurred to the bird at that moment,
and after a brief flurry of  screeching  and  of scratching  at the door
with  its  talons it  lapsed into  a grumpy and defeated  silence, which
after  it  had  been  going  on  for  about  a minute  became  almost as
disturbing as the previous batterings. 
   Dirk wondered what it was up to. 
   He approached the  door cautiously and  very, very quietly moved  the
chair  back  a  little so  that  he could  see through  the keyhole.  He
squatted down and  peered through it. At first it seemed to  him that he
could  see  nothing through it, that it must  be blocked  by  something.
Then,  a slight flicker and glint close  up  on the other  side suddenly
revealed the startling truth,  which was that the eagle also had  an eye
up at the keyhole and was  busy looking back at him. Dirk almost toppled
backwards with the shock of the  realisation,  and  backed away from the
door with a sense of slight horror and revulsion. 
   This  was extremely intelligent behaviour for an eagle wasn’t it? Was
it?  How could he  find out?  He  couldn’t think of  any  ornithological
experts to  phone. All his reference  books were piled up in other rooms
of  the house, and he didn’t think he’d be able to keep  on pulling  off
the same  stunt with impunity, certainly not when he was dealing with an
eagle which had managed to figure out what keyholes were for. 
   He  retreated  to the kitchen sink and found some  kitchen  towel. He
folded it into a wad,  soaked  it,  and dabbed it first on  his bleeding
temple, which was  swelling  up  nicely, and then on his nose  which was
still very tender, and had been  a considerable size for most of the day
now. Maybe the  eagle  was  an eagle of delicate sensibilities  and  had
reacted badly  to the  sight of Dirk’s face in its current, much abused,
state and had simply lost its mind. Dirk sighed and sat down. 
   Kate’s telephone,  which  was the next thing he turned his  attention
to,  was answered by a machine when he  tried to ring it. Her voice told
him, very sweetly, that  he was welcome  to  leave a  message  after the
beep, but warned that she hardly ever listened to them  and that it  was
much better to  talk  to her  directly,  only  he  couldn’t because  she
wasn’t in, so he’d best try again. 
   Thank you very much, he thought, and put the phone down. 
   He realised  that the truth of the  matter was this: he had spent the
day putting off  opening the  envelope  because  of what he was  worried
about  finding  in it.  It wasn’t that the idea was  frightening, though
indeed it was frightening that a man  should  sell  his soul to a green-
eyed man with a scythe, which is  what  circumstances were  trying  very
hard  to  suggest  had  happened.  It  was just  that it  was  extremely
depressing that he should sell  it to a green-eyed man with  a scythe in
exchange for a share in the royalties of a hit record. 
   That was what it looked like on the face of it. Wasn’t it? 
   Dirk picked  up the other  envelope,  the one which had been  waiting
for him on his doormat, delivered there by  courier from a  large London
bookshop where Dirk had an  account. He pulled out  the  contents, which
were  a  copy of  the  sheet music  of /Hot Potato/,  written  by  Colin
Paignton, Phil Mulville and Geoff Anstey. 
   The  lyrics  were,  well,  straightforward.  They  provided  a  basic
repetitive bit of funk rhythm  and a simple sense of menace and cheerful
callousness which had caught the mood of last summer. They went: 
   /Hot Potato, 
   Don’t pick it up, pick it up, pick it up. 
   Quick, pass it on, pass it on, pass it on. 
   You don’t want to get caught, get caught, get caught. 
   Drop it on someone. Who? Who? Anybody. 
   You better not have it when the big one comes. 
   I said you better not have it when the big one comes. 
   It’s a Hot Potato./
   And so on.  The repeated phrases got tossed back  and forward between
the two members of the  band, the drum machine  got heavier and heavier,
and there had been a dance video. 
   Was that all  it  was going to be? Big  deal. A nice house in  Lupton
Street with polyurethaned floors and a broken marriage? 
   Things had  certainly  come down a long way since  the great  days of
Faust  and Mephistopheles,  when  a man  could gain all the knowledge of
the universe,  achieve  all  the  ambitions  of  his mind  and  all  the
pleasures of the  flesh  for the  price  of  his soul. Now it  was a few
record royalties, a few pieces  of trendy  furniture, a trinket to stick
on your bathroom wall and, whap, your head comes off. 
   So  what exactly was  the  deal? What was the  /Potato/ contract? Who
was getting what and why? 
   Dirk  rummaged through  a drawer  for  the breadknife, sat down  once
more, took  the  envelope from  his  coat pocket and  ripped through the
congealed strata of Sellotape which held the end of it together. 
   Out fell a thick bundle of papers. 
   
   
[::: CHAPTER 22 :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::]
   
   At  exactly the moment that  the  telephone rang,  the door to Kate’s
sitting-room opened. The Thunder  God attempted to stomp in  through it,
but in fact he wafted. He had clearly soaked himself very  thoroughly in
the stuff Kate  had thrown into  the bath, then redressed, and torn up a
nightgown of Kate’s to  bind  his  forearm with.  He  casually tossed  a
handful  of  softened  oak shards away into the corner of the room. Kate
decided for the moment  to  ignore both the deliberate  provocations and
the telephone. The former she could  deal with  and the latter she had a
machine for dealing with. 
   ‘I’ve  been  reading  about  you,’ she challenged  the  Thunder  God.
‘Where’s your beard?’ 
   He took  the book,  a  one  volume encyclopaedia, from her hands  and
glanced at it before tossing it aside contemptuously. 
   ‘Ha,’ he said, ‘I shaved it  off. When I was in Wales.’ He scowled at
the memory. 
   ‘What were you doing in Wales for heaven’s sake?’ 
   ‘Counting the  stones,’ he  said with  a shrug, and went to stare out
of the window. 
   There was  a  huge,  moping  anxiety  in  his  bearing.  It  suddenly
occurred to Kate  with  a spasm of something not entirely  unlike  fear,
that  sometimes when  people  got  like  that,  it was because  they had
picked up their mood from the  weather. With a Thunder God it presumably
worked the  other way  round. The  sky outside certainly  had a restless
and disgruntled look. 
   Her reactions suddenly started to become very confused. 
   ‘Excuse me  if this sounds like  a stupid  question,’ said Kate, ‘but
I’m  a little at sea  here.  I’m not  used to spending the evening  with
someone who’s  got a  whole day named  after them. What  stones were you
counting in Wales?’ 
   ‘All of them,’ said Thor  in a low  growl. ‘All of them between  this
size...’ he held the tip of  his forefinger and thumb about a quarter of
an  inch apart, ‘...and this  size.’  He held his two hands about a yard
apart, and then put them down again. 
   Kate stared at him blankly. 
   ‘Well...how many  were there?’  she asked.  It seemed only  polite to
ask. 
   He rounded on her angrily. 
   ‘Count them  yourself  if you want to know!’ he shouted.  ‘What’s the
point in  my  spending years and years and years counting them, so  that
I’m the only person who knows, and who  will ever know, if I just go and
tell somebody else? Well?’ 
   He turned back to the window. 
   ‘Anyway,’  he said,  ‘I’ve been  worried about it. I think I may have
lost count somewhere  in Mid-Glamorgan. But I’m not,’ he shouted, ‘going
to do it again!’ 
   ‘Well,  why on  earth would you do such an extraordinary thing in the
first place?’ 
   ‘It was  a  burden  placed  on  me  by  my father.  A  punishment.  A
penance.’ He glowered. 
   ‘Your father?’ said Kate. ‘Do you mean Odin?’ 
   ‘The All-Father,’ said Thor. ‘Father of the Gods of Asgard.’ 
   ‘And you’re saying he’s alive?’ 
   Thor turned to look at her as if she was stupid. 
   ‘We are immortals,’ he said, simply. 
   Downstairs,  Neil  chose  that  moment  to  conclude  his  thunderous
performance on the  bass, and the house seemed to sing in  its aftermath
with an eerie silence. 
   ‘Immortals are what  you wanted,’  said Thor  in a  low, quiet voice.
‘Immortals are what you got. It is a little  hard  on us.  You wanted us
to be for ever, so we are for ever. Then  you forget about us. But still
we are for ever.  Now at last, many are dead, many dying,’ he then added
in a quiet voice, ‘but it takes a special effort.’ 
   ‘I  can’t even begin to understand  what  you’re talking about,’ said
Kate, ‘you say that I, we --’ 
   ‘You /can/ begin to understand,’  said Thor, angrily, ‘which is why I
have come to you.  Do you  know  that most people hardly see  me? Hardly
notice  me  at all? It  is not that we  are hidden. We are here. We move
among you. My people. Your gods.  You  gave birth to us.  You made us be
what you would not dare to be  yourselves. Yet you will  not acknowledge
us. If I walk along  one  of your streets in  this...world you have made
for yourselves without  us, then barely an  eye will  once flicker in my
direction.’ 
   ‘Is this when you’re wearing the helmet?’ 
   ‘Especially when I’m wearing the helmet!’ 
   ‘Well --’ 
   ‘You make fun of me!’ roared Thor. 
   ‘You make it very easy for a girl,’ said  Kate. ‘I don’t know what --
’ 
   Suddenly  the room seemed to quake and then to catch  its breath. All
of Kate’s insides wobbled  violently  and  then held very  still. In the
sudden horrible silence,  a blue china table lamp slowly toppled off the
table, hit the floor, and  crawled  off  to  a  dark corner of the  room
where it sat in a worried little defensive huddle. 
   Kate stared at  it  and  tried  to be  calm  about it. She felt as if
cold, soft jelly was trickling down her skin. 
   ‘Did you do that?’ she said shakily. 
   Thor was looking  livid  and confused. He muttered, ‘Do not  make  me
angry with you. You were very lucky.’ He looked away. 
   ‘What are you /saying/?’ 
   ‘I’m saying that I wish you to come with me.’ 
   ‘What? What about /that/?’ She pointed at  the small befuddled kitten
under the table which  had so  recently and so  confusingly been  a blue
china table lamp. 
   ‘There’s nothing I can do for it.’ 
   Kate  was suddenly  so tired  and  confused  and frightened that  she
found she was  nearly in  tears. She stood  biting her lip and trying to
be as angry as she could. 
   ‘Oh  yeah?’ she  said. ‘I thought you were  meant to be a god. I hope
you  haven’t  got into my home under false pretences, I...’ She stumbled
to a halt, and then resumed in a different tone of voice. 
   ‘Do you mean,’ she said, in a small  voice, ‘that you have been here,
in the world, /all this time/?’ 
   ‘Here, and in Asgard,’ said Thor. 
   ‘Asgard,’ said Kate. ‘The home of the gods?’ 
   Thor was silent. It  was a  grim silence  that seemed to be  full  of
something that bothered him deeply. 
   ‘Where is Asgard?’ demanded Kate. 
   Again  Thor  did  not  speak. He was a  man  of  very  few words  and
enormously long  pauses.  When at  last  he did answer, it wasn’t at all
clear whether  he had been  thinking  all  that  time  or just  standing
there. 
   ‘Asgard is also here,’ he said. ‘All worlds are here.’ 
   He  drew  out from under  his  furs his great hammer and studied  its
head deeply and  with an odd  curiosity,  as if  something  about it was
very puzzling.  Kate wondered  where she  found such a  gesture familiar
from.  She found  that  it instinctively  made  her  want  to duck.  She
stepped back very slightly and was watchful. 
   When  he  looked up again,  there was  an  altogether new  focus  and
energy in  his eyes, as if  he  was gathering himself up to hurl himself
at something. 
   ‘Tonight  I must be in Asgard,’  he said. ‘I must confront my  father
Odin  in the great hall of Valhalla and bring him to account for what he
has done.’ 
   ‘You mean, for making you count Welsh pebbles?’ 
   ‘No!’ said Thor.  ‘For  making the Welsh pebbles not worth counting!’
   Kate  shook her head in  exasperation.  ‘I  simply don’t know what to
make  of you  at all,’ she said. ‘I  think I’m just too tired. Come back
tomorrow. Explain it all in the morning.’ 
   ‘No,’  said Thor. ‘You must see  Asgard  yourself, and  then you will
understand. You must see it tonight.’ He gripped her by the arm. 
   ‘I  don’t  want  to  go to Asgard,’  she  insisted.  ‘I don’t  go  to
mythical  places with strange men. You go. Call me up and tell me how it
went in the morning. Give him hell about the pebbles.’ 
   She  wrested her arm  from his  grip. It was very, very clear  to her
that she only did this with his permission. 
   ‘Now please, go, and let me sleep!’ She glared at him. 
   At  that moment  the house seemed  to erupt  as Neil launched  into a
thumping  bass  rendition  of  Siegfried’s  Rheinfahrt  from  Act  1  of
/Götterdämmerung/, just to prove  it could be done. The walls shook, the
windows rattled.  From under  the  table the  sound  of  the table  lamp
mewing pathetically could just be heard. 
   Kate tried to maintain her  furious glare, but it simply  couldn’t be
kept up for very long in the circumstances. 
   ‘OK,’ she said at last, ‘how do we get to this place?’ 
   ‘There are as many ways as there are tiny pieces.’ 
   ‘I beg your pardon?’ 
   ‘Tiny things.’ He held up his  thumb and forefinger again to indicate
something   very   small.   ‘Molecules,’  he   added,   seeming  to   be
uncomfortable with the word. ‘But first let us leave here.’ 
   ‘Will I need a coat in Asgard?’ 
   ‘As you wish.’ 
   ‘Well, I’ll take one anyway. Wait a minute.’ 
   She decided that the best way to deal with  the astonishing rigmarole
which  currently constituted her life  was  to be businesslike about it.
She  found  her  coat,  brushed her hair,  left  a  new message  on  her
telephone  answering machine  and  put a saucer of milk firmly under the
table. 
   ‘Right,’  she  said,  and led the way  out of  the  flat, locking  it
carefully after  them,  and making shushing noises as they passed Neil’s
door.  For  all  the  uproar  he was  currently  making  he  was  almost
certainly listening out for  the  slightest sound, and would be out in a
moment if  he  heard them  going  by  to  complain  about the  Coca-Cola
machine,  the  lateness  of  the  hour,  man’s  inhumanity  to man,  the
weather, the noise, and the colour of Kate’s coat, which was a  shade of
blue that Neil  for some reason  disapproved of  most particularly. They
stole past successfully and closed the  front door behind them with  the
merest click. 
   
   
[::: CHAPTER 23 :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::]
   
   The sheets  which tumbled out on to Dirk’s kitchen table were made of
thick  heavy  paper,  folded  together,  and  had  obviously  been  much
handled. 
   He sorted them out,  one  by one,  separating  them from each  other,
smoothing them out with the flat of his hand and laying them out  neatly
in rows on  the kitchen table, clearing a space, as it became necessary,
among the old newspapers, ashtrays and  dirty  cereal  bowls which Elena
the  cleaner  always  left  exactly  where  they  were,  claiming,  when
challenged on this, that she thought he had put them there specially. 
   He pored  over  the papers for several  minutes,  moving  from one to
another, comparing them  with each other, studying them  carefully, page
by page, paragraph by paragraph, line by line. 
   He couldn’t understand a word of them. 
   It  should have occurred to him,  he  realised, that  the green-eyed,
hairy, scythe-waving  giant  might differ from  him not only  in general
appearance and  personal  habits,  but  also  in  such  matters  as  the
alphabet he favoured. 
   He sat back in his  seat, disgruntled and thwarted, and reached for a
cigarette, but the  packet  in  his coat was  now empty. He picked  up a
pencil and tapped it  in a cigarette-like  way,  but  it wasn’t able  to
produce the same effect. 
   After a minute  or two he  became acutely conscious  of the fact that
he was probably  still being  watched through  the keyhole by  the eagle
and  he found  that this made  it impossibly hard  to concentrate on the
problem  before  him,  particularly without a cigarette.  He scowled  to
himself. He knew there was  still a packet upstairs  by  his bed, but he
didn’t think he could handle  the sheer ornithology involved in going to
get it. 
   He  tried to  stare  at the papers for  a little longer. The writing,
apart  from  being   written   in  some   kind  of  small,   crabby  and
indecipherable runic script,  was  mostly  hunched up towards  the left-
hand side of the paper  as if swept there by a tide. The right-hand side
was largely clear  except for an  occasional group  of characters  which
were lined up underneath  each other. All  of it,  except for  a  slight
sense  of  undefinable  familiarity  about  the layout,  was  completely
meaningless to Dirk. 
   He turned his attention back  to the  envelope instead and tried once
more  to examine some of the  names  which  had  been so heavily crossed
out. 
   Howard  Bell, the incredibly  wealthy bestselling novelist who  wrote
bad books  which  sold  by  the  warehouse-load  despite --  or  perhaps
because of -- the fact that nobody read them. 
   Dennis Hutch, record company magnate.  Now that he had  a context for
the  name,  Dirk knew it perfeetly well. The  Aries  Rising Record Group
which  had  been  founded on Sixties ideals, or at least on what  passed
for ideals in  the Sixties, grown in the Seventies and then embraced the
materialism of  the Eighties  without missing a beat, was now  a massive
entertainment conglomerate  on both sides of the Atlantic.  Dennis Hutch
had stepped  up into the top  seat when its founder had died of a lethal
overdose  of brick  wall, taken while under the  influence  of a Ferrari
and a bottle  of tequila. ARRGH! was also the record label on which /Hot
Potato/ had been released. 
   Stan Dubcek,  senior  partner  in  the advertising  company  with the
silly name which now owned most of the  British and American advertising
companies which  had not  had names which were  quite as  silly, and had
therefore been swallowed whole. 
   And   here,   suddenly,   was   another  name   that   was  instantly
recognisable, now that Dirk was  attuned to the sort of names  he should
be  looking for. Roderick Mercer, the  world’s greatest publisher of the
world’s sleaziest  newspapers.  Dirk hadn’t  at first spotted  the  name
with the  unfamiliar  ‘...erick’ in place after  the  ‘Rod’. Well, well,
well... 
   Now  here  were people, thought Dirk suddenly,  who  had  really  got
something. Certainly they  had got rather more than  a nice little house
in  Lupton  Road  with some  dried  flowers lying around the place. They
also  had  the great  advantage  of  having heads on  their shoulders as
well, unless Dirk had  missed something new  and dramatic on  the  news.
What  did that all  mean?  What was  this  contract? How  come everybody
whose  hands  it had been through  had  been  so astoundingly successful
except for one, Geoffrey  Anstey?  Everybody  whose  hands it had passed
through  had benefited from it  except for  the one who had it last. Who
had still got it. 
   It was a hot potato...
   /You better not have it when the big one comes./ 
   The  notion suddenly  formed in  Dirk’s mind  that it might have been
Geoffrey Anstey himself  who  had overheard  a conversation about a  hot
potato,  about  getting rid  of  it,  passing  it on. If  he  remembered
correctly the interview he  had read with Pain, he  didn’t  say that  he
himself had overheard the conversation. 
   /You better not have it when the big one comes./ 
   The notion was a  horrible  one and ran on like this: Geoffrey Anstey
had  been  pathetically  naïve.  He  had  overheard  this  conversation,
between -- who? Dirk picked  up the envelope  and ran over  the list  of
names -- and  had thought that  it had  a good dance rhythm. He  had not
for a  moment realised that  what he was listening to was a conversation
that would result in his own hideous death. He had got a hit  record out
of it,  and when the real hot potato was actually  handed to him he  had
picked it up. 
   /Don’t pick it up, pick it up, pick it up./ 
   And instead of taking the advice he had recorded in the  words of the
song... 
   /Quick, pass it on, pass it on, pass it on./ 
   ...he had  stuck  it  behind the  gold  record award on his  bathroom
wall. 
   /You better not have it when the big one comes./
   Dirk frowned and took a long, slow thoughtful drag on his pencil. 
   This was ridiculous. 
   He had  to get some cigarettes if he was going to think  this through
with any  intellectual rigour. He pulled on his coat, stuffed his hat on
his head and made for the window. 
   The  window  hadn’t been opened for -- well, certainly not during his
ownership  of the house,  and it  struggled and  screamed at the  sudden
unaccustomed invasion of its space  and independence. Once he had forced
it  wide  enough,  Dirk  struggled out on  to  the  windowsill,  pulling
swathes  of leather coat out  with him. From here it was a bit of a jump
to the pavement since there was a lower ground floor to  the house  with
a narrow  flight  of steps leading down to  it in the front.  A  line of
iron railings  separated these from the  pavement, and  Dirk  had to get
clear over these. 
   Without hesitating for a moment he  made the jump, and it was in mid-
bound that he  realised  he had  not  picked  up his  car keys from  the
kitchen table where he’d left them. 
   He  considered as  he sailed gracelessly through  the air whether  or
not to execute  a  wild  mid-air twist, make  a desperate grab backwards
for  the window and hope  that he might  just manage to  hold on to  the
sill,  but  decided on  mature reflection that  an  error at  this point
might just conceivably kill  him whereas  the walk would probably do him
good. 
   He  landed heavily on the far side  of the railings, but the tails of
his coat  became entangled  with  them  and he  had  to  pull them  off,
tearing  part of  the lining  in  the process. Once the ringing shock in
his knees  had subsided and  he had recovered  what little composure the
events of the day  had left him with,  he realised that it was now  well
after eleven  o’clock and the pubs would  be shut,  and he might have  a
longer walk than he had bargained for to find some cigarettes. 
   He considered what to do. 
   The current outlook  and state  of  mind  of  the eagle  was a  major
factor to  be  taken into account here. The only way to get his car keys
now was back through the front door into his eagle-infested hallway. 
   Moving with great  caution he tip-toed back up the steps to his front
door,  squatted  down  and, hoping that the damn  thing wasn’t  going to
squeak, gently pushed up the flap of the letter-box and  peered through.
   In  an instant  a talon was  hooked into  the back of his hand  and a
great  screeching  beak slashed  at his  eye,  narrowly  missing it  but
scratching a great gouge across his much abused nose. 
   Dirk  howled  with pain and lurched backwards, not  getting  very far
because  he  still  had a  talon  hooked in  his  hand.  He  lashed  out
desperately and  hit at  the talon, which hurt him considerably, dug the
sharp point  even further  into  his flesh and caused a  great,  barging
flurry  on the far side  of the  door, each  tiniest  movement of  which
tugged heavily in his hand. 
   He grabbed at the great claw with  his free hand  and tried to tug it
back out of himself. It was immensely strong, and was  shaking with  the
fury  of the eagle, which was  as trapped  as he was. At last, quivering
with pain, he managed to release  himself, and pulled his  injured  hand
back, nursing and cuddling it with the other. 
   The eagle pulled  its  claw back sharply,  and Dirk heard it flapping
away back down  his hallway, emitting terrible screeches and  cries, its
great wings colliding with and scraping the walls. 
   Dirk  toyed with  the idea of  burning  the house down,  but once the
throbbing in his hand had begun to  subside  a little he calmed down and
tried, if he could, to see things from the eagle’s point of view. 
   He couldn’t. 
   He  had  not  the  faintest idea how things  appeared  to  eagles  in
general,  much  less to this  particular eagle,  which  seemed  to  be a
seriously deranged example of the species. 
   After a minute or so  more of  nursing his hand,  curiosity -- allied
to a strong  sense that  the eagle had definitely retreated  to the  far
end of the hall and stayed there -- overcame him, and he bent  down once
more to the letter-box.  This  time  he used his pencil to push the flap
back  upwards  and scanned the hallway  from a safe position  a good few
inches back. 
   The eagle  was clearly  in view,  perched on the end of the bannister
rail, regarding  him with resentment and opprobrium, which Dirk felt was
a little  rich coming from a creature which had only a moment or two ago
been busily engaged in trying to rip his hand off. 
   Then,  once the eagle  was certain that it had  got Dirk’s attention,
it slowly raised itself up on its feet  and slowly shook its great wings
out, beating them  gently  for balance. It was  this  gesture  that  had
previously  caused  Dirk  to bolt prudently from  the room.  This  time,
however, he was safely behind a  couple of good solid inches of wood and
he  stood, or rather, squatted his ground. The  eagle stretched its neck
upwards  as  well,  jabbing  its  tongue  out  at  the  air  and  cawing
plaintively, which surprised Dirk. 
   Then he  noticed  something  else rather surprising  about the eagle,
which  was  that its wings had  strange,  un-eaglelike markings on them.
They were large concentric circles. 
   The differences  of coloration which delineated the circles were very
slight, and it was only the absolute geometric regularity of  them which
made  them  stand out  as clearly as  they  did. Dirk had the very clear
sense  that the eagle  was showing  him these circles, and that that was
what it had wanted to attract his attention to all  along. Each time the
bird  had dived at  him,  he  realised  as he  thought back, it had then
started  on  a  strange  kind  of flapping  routine  which had  involved
opening  its  wings  right out. However, each time  it had happened Dirk
had  been too  busily  engaged with the business  of turning  round  and
running away to pay this exhibition the appropriate attention. 
   ‘Have you got the money for a cup of tea, mate?’ 
   ‘Er, yes thank you,’ said Dirk, ‘I’m  fine.’  His attention was fully
occupied with the eagle, and he didn’t immediately look round. 
   ‘No, I meant can you spare me a bob or two, just  for a cup of  tea?’
   ‘What?’ This time Dirk looked round, irritably. 
   ‘Or just a fag, mate. Got a fag you can spare?’ 
   ‘No, I was just going to go and get some myself,’ said Dirk. 
   The  man on the pavement behind him was a tramp of indeterminate age.
He was  standing  there, slightly  wobbly,  with  a  look  of  wild  and
continuous disappointment bobbing in his eyes. 
   Not getting an  immediate response  from  Dirk, the  man  dropped his
eyes to the ground  about a  yard in  front of him, and swayed back  and
forth  a little. He was  holding his  arms out,  slightly open, slightly
away from his body, and just swaying. Then he frowned  suddenly  at  the
ground. Then  he  frowned  at another part  of the ground. Then, holding
himself steady  while he made  quite a major realignment of his head, he
frowned away down the street. 
   ‘Have you lost something?’ said Dirk. 
   The man’s head swayed back towards him. 
   ‘Have I /lost/ something?’ he said in  querulous  astonishment. ‘Have
I /lost/ something?’ 
   It seemed to be  the most  astounding question he had  ever heard. He
looked away  again for a while, and  seemed to be trying  to balance the
question in the general  scale of things.  This involved a fair bit more
swaying and a  fair  few more frowns. At last he seemed to  come up with
something that might do service as some kind of answer. 
   ‘The sky?’ he said,  challenging Dirk to  find  this  a  good  enough
answer.  He looked  up towards  it, carefully, so as  not  to  lose  his
balance. He seemed not  to  like what he saw in the dim, orange, street-
lit  pallor of the clouds, and slowly looked back down again till he was
staring at a point just in front of his feet. 
   ‘The  ground?’ he said, with  evident great dissatisfaction, and then
was struck with a sudden thought. 
   ‘Frogs?’  he  said,  wobbling  his  gaze  up  to meet  Dirk’s  rather
bewildered one. ‘I  used to  like...frogs,’  he said, and  left his gaze
sitting on Dirk as if that  was  all he  had  to  say, and the  rest was
entirely up to Dirk now. 
   Dirk was completely flummoxed. He longed for  the times when life had
been easy, life had been carefree, the great  times he’d had with a mere
homicidal eagle,  which seemed  now to be such an easygoing and  amiable
companion.  Aerial attack he  could  cope  with,  but not this  nameless
roaring guilt that came howling at him out of nowhere. 
   ‘What do you want?’ he said in a strangled voice. 
   ‘Just a fag,  mate,’ said the tramp, ‘or something for a cup of tea.’
   Dirk  pressed a  pound  coin into the man’s hand  and lunged off down
the street  in a panic,  passing,  twenty yards further  on, a builder’s
skip from which the shape of his old fridge loomed at him menacingly. 
   
   
[::: CHAPTER 24 :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::]
   
   As Kate  came  down  the steps  from  her house she noticed that  the
temperature  had dropped  considerably.  The  clouds sat heavily on  the
land  and loured  at it.  Thor set off briskly in  the  direction of the
park, and Kate trotted along in his wake. 
   As  he strode  along,  an extraordinary  figure  on  the  streets  of
Primrose  Hill, Kate could  not help but notice that he had been  right.
They  passed three  different people  on the way, and she saw distinctly
how  their  eyes avoided  looking  at  him,  even  as  they had  to make
allowance  for his great  bulk as he  passed them. He was not invisible,
far from it. He simply didn’t fit. 
   The park was closed for  the  night, but Thor leapt quickly over  the
spiked railings  and then  lifted her over in turn as lightly as  if she
had been a bunch of flowers. 
   The  grass was  damp and mushy, but  still worked its  magic on  city
feet. Kate did what she always did when entering the park, which was  to
bob  down and  put  the  flats  of  her hands  down  on the ground for a
moment.  She had  never quite worked out why she did this, and often she
would adjust a shoe or pick up a  piece of litter as a  pretext for  the
movement,  but all she really wanted was to feel the grass  and  the wet
earth on her palms. 
   The  park from this viewpoint was simply a dark shoulder that rose up
before them,  obscuring itself. They  mounted the hill and  stood on the
top of it,  looking over the darkness of the rest of the  park to  where
it  shaded off into the hazy light of the heart  of  London which lay to
the  south.  Ugly  towers and  blocks  stuck  yobbishly  up  out  of the
skyline, dominating the park, the sky, and the city. 
   A cold, damp wind moved  across the park, flicking at it from time to
time like the  tail of a dark and broody horse. There  was an unsettled,
edgy quality  to it. In fact the night sky seemed to  Kate to  be like a
train of restless, irritable horses,  their traces flapping and slapping
in  the wind.  It  also  seemed  to  her as if  the  traces all radiated
loosely from  a single  centre,  and that the  centre was very  close by
her.   She   reprimanded  herself   for   absurd   suggestibility,   but
nevertheless, it still seemed that  all  the  weather  was  gathered and
circling around them, waiting on them. 
   Thor once more drew  out his  hammer, and  held it before him  in the
thoughtful  and abstracted manner she  had seen a few  minutes before in
her flat. He frowned,  and seemed to be picking tiny invisible pieces of
dust  off it. It was a little like a chimpanzee grooming its mate, or --
that was it! --  the comparison was extraordinary, but  it explained why
she  had tensed herself  so watchfully  when last he had done it. It was
like Jimmy Connors minutely adjusting the  strings of his racquet before
preparing to serve. 
   He looked  up sharply  once  again, drew his  arm back, turned  fully
once, twice,  three times, twisting  his  heels heavily in  the mud, and
then hurled his hammer with astonishing force up to the heavens. 
   It  vanished almost instantly into the  murky haze of the  sky.  Damp
flashes  sparked deep within  the  clouds, tracking  its path  in a long
parabola  through the  night. At the furthest extent  of the parabola it
swung  down  out of  the clouds, a  distant tiny pinpoint  moving slowly
now, gathering and redirecting  its momentum for the return flight. Kate
watched, breathless, as the speck crept behind the  dome  of  St Paul’s.
It then  seemed almost as if it  had halted altogether, hanging silently
and  improbably  in the  air,  before  gradually  beginning  to increase
microscopically in size as it accelerated back towards them. 
   Then,  as  it  returned,  it  swung  aside  in  its  path, no  longer
describing a simple parabola,  but  following instead a  new  path which
seemed to lie along the perimeter of a  gigantic Mobius strip which took
it round  the  other side  of  the  Telecom Tower. Then  suddenly it was
swinging back in a  path  directly  towards them, hurtling  out  of  the
night with  impossible  weight  and speed like a  piston  in a  shaft of
light. Kate swayed  and nearly dropped in  a dead faint out of its path,
when Thor stepped forward and caught it with a grunt. 
   The jolt of it sent a single  heavy shudder down into  the earth, and
then the  thing was  resting  quietly  in  Thor’s grip. His arm quivered
slightly and was still. 
   Kate felt quite dizzy. She  didn’t know  exactly what it was that had
just happened,  but she felt pretty damn certain that it was the sort of
experience that  her  mother would not have approved of on a first date.
   ‘Is  this  all part of what we have to do to go to Asgard?’ she said.
‘Or are you just fooling around?’ 
   ‘We will go to Asgard...now,’ he said. 
   At that moment  he  raised  his hand as if  to  pluck  an apple,  but
instead of  plucking he made a  tiny, sharp turning movement. The effect
was as if he had twisted the  entire world through a billionth part of a
billionth  part  of  a  degree.  Everything  shifted,  was for a  moment
minutely  out  of  focus,  and  then  snapped back again as  a  suddenly
different world. 
   This world was a much darker one and colder still. 
   A  bitter, putrid wind blew sharply, and made every breath gag in the
throat.  The ground beneath  their feet  was no  longer the  soft  muddy
grass of the  hill, but a foul-smelling, oozing slush. Darkness lay over
all  the horizon with a  few small  exceptional  fires  dotted here  and
there in the distance, and one  great blaze of light about a mile and  a
half away to the south-east. 
   Here, great  fantastical towers stabbed at the night;  huge pinnacles
and  turrets flickered in  the  firelight that  surged  from  a thousand
windows. It was  an edifice that  mocked reason, ridiculed  reality  and
jeered wildly at the night. 
   ‘My  father’s palace,’ said Thor, ‘the Great  Hall  of Valhalla where
we must go.’ 
   It was just on the tip  of Kate’s tongue to  say that something about
the place was oddly familiar  when the  sound of horses’ hooves pounding
through the mud came to them on the  wind. At a distance,  between where
they stood and the Great Hall of Valhalla, a small  number of flickering
torches could be seen jolting towards them. 
   Thor once more studied the head of his hammer  with interest, brushed
it with his forefinger  and rubbed  it  with his thumb. Then  slowly  he
looked up, again he  twisted round once, then twice and a third time and
then hurled the  missile  into the sky. This time, however, he continued
to  hold on  to its  shaft with  his right  hand, while with his left he
held Kate’s waist in his grasp. 
   
   
[::: CHAPTER 25 :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::]
   
   Cigarettes clearly  intended to make  themselves a major  problem for
Dirk tonight. 
   For most  of the  day, except for  when he’d woken up, and except for
again  shortly  after he’d woken up,  and except  for  when he  had just
encountered  the   revolving   head   of  Geoffrey  Anstey,   which  was
understandable,  and also  except for  when  he’d  been in the  pub with
Kate, he had had absolutely no cigarettes at all. 
   Not one. They  were  out of  his life,  foresworn utterly.  He didn’t
need them. He could do  without them. They merely nagged at him like mad
and made his life a living hell, but he decided he could handle that. 
   Now, however, just when he had suddenly decided,  coolly, rationally,
as  a  clear,  straightforward  decision  rather than  merely  a  feeble
surrender to craving, that he would, after all, have a  cigarette, could
he find one? He could not. 
   The pubs by this stage of the night were  well closed. The late night
corner shop  obviously  meant  something different  by ‘late night’ than
Dirk  did, and  though Dirk  was  certain that  he  could  convince  the
proprietor  of the rightness of his  case through sheer  linguistic  and
syllogistic bravado, the wretched man wasn’t there to undergo it. 
   A mile away there was a 24-hour filling station,  but  it  turned out
just to have  sustained an  armed robbery. The plate glass was shattered
and crazed round a tiny  hole, police were swarming over the place.  The
attendant was  apparently  not  badly  injured, but he  was still losing
blood from  a wound in his arm, having hysterics and being  treated  for
shock,  and no one would sell Dirk any  cigarettes.  They simply weren’t
in the mood. 
   ‘You  could buy  cigarettes  in  the  blitz,’ protested Dirk. ‘People
took  a pride in it. Even  with  the  bombs falling and  the whole  city
ablaze you  could still get served.  Some poor  fellow,  just  lost  two
daughters and a leg,  would  still say “Plain  or filter tipped?” if you
asked him.’ 
   ‘I expect you would, too,’ muttered a white-faced young policeman. 
   ‘It was the spirit of the age,’ said Dirk. 
   ‘Bug off,’ said the policeman. 
   And that,  thought  Dirk  to  himself,  was  the  spirit  of this. He
retreated, miffed,  and decided to prowl the  streets with his hands  in
his pockets for a while. 
   Camden Passage. Antique clocks. Antique clothes. No cigarettes. 
   Upper  Street.  Antique  buildings being  ripped  apart. No  sign  of
cigarette shops being put up in their place. 
   Chapel  Market,  desolate  at  night.  Wet  litter  wildly  flapping.
Cardboard boxes,  egg boxes, paper bags  and cigarette packets --  empty
ones. 
   Pentonville Road.  Grim concrete monoliths,  eyeing the new spaces in
Upper Street where they hoped to spawn their horrid progeny. 
   King’s Cross station. They  must  have cigarettes, for heaven’s sake.
Dirk hurried on down towards it. 
   The old frontage to  the station reared up above  the  area,  a great
yellow  brick wall  with a clock tower and two huge arches  fronting the
two  great  train  sheds behind. In  front  of  this  lay the one-storey
modern concourse  which  was already far  shabbier than  the building, a
hundred  years  its senior,  which it obscured and generally messed  up.
Dirk imagined that  when the designs  for the modern concourse had  been
drawn up the architects  had  explained that it entered into an exciting
and challenging dialogue with the older building. 
   King’s Cross is an  area where  terrible things happen  to people, to
buildings,  to cars,  to  trains,  usually  while you wait,  and  if you
weren’t careful you could easily end up involved in  a piece of exciting
and  challenging  dialogue  yourself.  You could have a cheap car  radio
fitted while you waited, and  if  you turned  your back for  a couple of
minutes, it would be removed while  you waited as well. Other things you
could  have  removed while  you  waited were your  wallet, your  stomach
lining,  your  mind and your will  to live. The muggers and  pushers and
pimps and  hamburger salesmen, in no particular order, could arrange all
these things for you. 
   But could they arrange a  packet of cigarettes, thought Dirk, with  a
mounting  sense of tension.  He crossed  York Way,  declined a couple of
surprising offers  on the grounds  that they did  not involve cigarettes
in any immediately obvious  way, hurried past the closed bookshop and in
through  the main concourse doors, away from the  life of the street and
into the safer domain of British Rail. 
   He looked around him. 
   Here things  seemed rather strange  and he  wondered why, but he only
wondered  this very briefly because  he was also  wondering if there was
anywhere open selling cigarettes and there wasn’t. 
   He  sagged forlornly.  It  seemed to  him  that he  had  been playing
catch-up  with the world  all day. The  morning had  started in about as
disastrous a way as  it was possible for a morning to start, and he  had
never managed to  get a proper grip  on it since. He felt  like somebody
trying  to  ride  a bolting horse, with one  foot in  a stirrup  and the
other one still bounding along  hopefully on the ground behind. And  now
even  as  simple a thing as a  cigarette was  proving  to be beyond  his
ability to get hold of. 
   He sighed and found himself a seat, or at least, room on a bench. 
   This was  not an immediately easy thing to do. The station  was  more
crowded than he had expected to find it at -- what was it?  he looked up
at the clock -- one o’clock in the morning. What in the name of  God was
he doing on King’s Cross station at  one o’clock in the morning, with no
cigarette  and  no home  that he  could  reasonably  expect to  get into
without being hacked to death by a homicidal bird? 
   He decided to feel sorry for  himself. That  would pass the  time. He
looked around  himself, and after a while the impulse to  feel sorry for
himself gradually subsided as he began to take in his surroundings. 
   What was strange  about  it was seeing  such  an immediately familiar
place looking so  unfamiliar.  There was the ticket  office, still  open
for ticket sales, but looking sombre and beleaguered and  wishing it was
closed. 
   There  was  the W.H.Smith,  closed for the  night.  No  one  would be
needing  any  further   newspapers  or  magazines  tonight,  except  for
purposes  of  accommodation,  and  old ones  would  do just as well  for
sleeping under. 
   The pimps and hookers, drug-pushers and hamburger  salesmen were  all
outside in the streets and in the hamburger  bars.  If you  wanted quick
sex or a  dirty  fix or, God help  you,  a hamburger, that was where you
went to get it. 
   Here were the  people that nobody  wanted  anything from at all. This
was  where they gathered for shelter until they were periodically shooed
out.  There  was something people  wanted from them,  in  fact  -- their
absence. That was in hot  demand, but not easily supplied. Everybody has
to be somewhere. 
   Dirk looked from one to another of  the men and women shuffling round
or sitting  hunched  in  seats or  struggling  to  try and sleep  across
benches that  were  specifically designed to  prevent  them  from  doing
exactly that. 
   ‘Got a fag, mate?’ 
   ‘What?  No,  I’m  sorry.  No,  I  haven’t  got  one,’  replied  Dirk,
awkwardly patting his coat  pockets  in embarrassment,  as if to suggest
the  making  of  a  search  which he knew  would  be  fruitless.  He was
startled to be summoned out of his reverie like this. 
   ‘Here  you  are, then.’ The old man offered him  a beat-up one from a
beat-up packet. 
   ‘What? Oh. Oh -- thanks.  Thank  you.’ Momentarily taken aback by the
offer, Dirk nevertheless accepted  the cigarette gratefully,  and took a
light from the tip of the cigarette the old man was smoking himself. 
   ‘What you come here for  then?’ asked the old man -- not challenging,
just curious. 
   Dirk tried  to  look  at him without  making  it  seem as  if he  was
looking  him up  and  down. The  man  was  wildly bereft  of  teeth, had
startled  and matted hair, and  his old clothes  were well  mulched down
around him, but the eyes  which sagged out of his face were fairly calm.
He wasn’t expecting  anything worse than he could deal with to happen to
him. 
   ‘Well,  just  this  in  fact,’  said Dirt,  twiddling the  cigarette.
‘Thanks. Couldn’t find one anywhere.’ 
   ‘Oh ah,’ said the old man. 
   ‘Got this mad bird at home,’ said Dirk. ‘Kept attacking me.’ 
   ‘Oh ah,’ said the man, nodding resignedly. 
   ‘I mean an actual bird,’ said Dirk, ‘an eagle.’ 
   ‘Oh ah.’ 
   ‘With great wings.’ 
   ‘Oh ah.’ 
   ‘Got hold of me with one of its talons through the letter-box.’ 
   ‘Oh ah.’ 
   Dirk  wondered  if  it  was  worth  pursuing  the  conversation  much
further. He lapsed into silence and looked around. 
   ‘You’re lucky it didn’t slash  at you with its  beak as  well,’  said
the old man after a while. ‘An eagle will do that when roused.’ 
   ‘It did!’ said Dirk.  ‘It did! Look, right  here on my nose. That was
through  the letter-box as  well. You’d scarcely believe it! Talk  about
grip! Talk about reach! Look at what it did to my hand!’ 
   He held it out for sympathy. The old man gave it an  appraising look.
   ‘Oh ah,’ he said at last, and retreated into his own thoughts. 
   Dirk drew his injured hand back. 
   ‘Know a lot about eagles, then, do you?’ 
   The  man didn’t answer, but seemed instead to retreat still  further.
   ‘Lot of people here tonight,’ Dirk ventured again, after a while. 
   The man shrugged.  He took a long drag on his cigarette, half closing
his eyes against the smoke. 
   ‘Is  it  always like this?  I  mean, are there always so many  people
here at night?’ 
   The man  merely  looked  down, slowly  releasing the  smoke  from his
mouth and nostrils. 
   Yet again, Dirk looked  around. A  man a few  feet  away, not so old-
looking as  Dirk’s companion  but  wildly deranged in his demeanour, had
sat nodding hectically over a bottle of cooking brandy  all  this  time.
He slowly stopped his nodding, screwed  with  difficulty a cap on to the
bottle,  and slipped it into the pocket of his  ragged old coat. An  old
fat woman who had been fitfully  browsing through the bulging black  bin
liner of her possessions  began to twist the top of it together and fold
it. 
   ‘You’d almost think that something  was about  to happen,’ said Dirk.
   ‘Oh  ah,’ said his companion. He  put his hands  on  his knees,  bent
forward  and  raised himself painfully  to his feet. Though he  was bent
and slow, and though  his clothes were dirt-ridden  and  tattered, there
was some little power and authority there in his bearing. 
   The air which he unsettled as he stood,  which  flowed  out from  the
folds of his skin and clothes, was richly  pungent even to Dirk’s numbed
nostrils.  It  was a  smell that  never stopped coming at you -- just as
Dirk thought it must have peaked, so  it  struck on upwards with renewed
frenzy till Dirk thought that his very brain would vaporise. 
   He tried not to choke, indeed  he tried to  smile courteously without
allowing his  eyes  to run as  the man  turned to him and  said, ‘Infuse
some blossom  of the bitter  orange.  Add some sprinklings of sage while
it  is  still warm. This is very good for  eagle wounds. There are those
who  will  add apricot  and almond oil  and even, the heavens defend us,
sedra.  But  then there  are always those that will  overdo things.  And
sometimes we have need of them. Oh ah.’ 
   With that  he turned away once more and joined the  growing stream of
pathetic, hunched and abused  bodies  that  were heading  for  the front
exit  from  the  station.  In  all  about  two,  maybe three  dozen were
leaving.  Each  seemed to be  leaving separately,  each for  his or  her
entirely independent  reasons,  and not  following too fast the one upon
the other,  and yet  it was not  hard  to tell, for  anyone who cared to
watch  these  people that no one cared  to watch or  see, that they were
leaving together and in a stream. 
   Dirk carefulty nursed  his cigarette for  a  minute or so and watched
them  intently as one by one they  left. Once  he was certain that there
were no  more to go, and that the  last two or three of them were at the
door,  he dropped the cigarette and ground it out with his heel. Then he
noticed that the old man  had left behind his crumpled cigarette packet.
Dirk  looked  inside  and  saw  that  there  were still  two  bedraggled
cigarettes left. He  pocketed it,  stood  up, and quietly followed  at a
distance that he thought was properly respectful. 
   Outside  on   the  Euston  Road  the  night  air  was  grumbling  and
unsettled. He  loitered  idly  by the doorway, watching  which  way they
went -- to the west.  He took  one of the  cigarettes out and lit it and
then idled off westwards himself,  around the  taxi  rank and towards St
Pancras Street. 
   On the west side of  St Pancras Street, just a few yards north of the
Euston Road, a  flight of  steps leads  up  to the forecourt of  the old
Midland Grand Hotel, the  huge, dark gothic  fantasy of a building which
stands,  empty  and desolate,  across the front of  St  Pancras  railway
station. 
   Over the top  of  the steps, picked out in gold letters  on  wrought-
iron-work,  stands  the  name  of the  station.  Taking his  time,  Dirk
followed the last  of the  band of  old  tramps and  derelicts up  these
steps, which  emerged just to the side of a small, squat, brick building
which was used as a car-park. To the right, the great dark hulk  of  the
old  hotel spread off into the night, its roofline a vast assortment  of
wild turrets, gnarled  spires and pinnacles which seemed to prod at  and
goad the night sky. 
   High in the dim  darkness, silent  stone  figures stood guard  behind
long  shields,  grouped around  pilasters  behind wrought-iron railings.
Carved  dragons  crouched  gaping  at the sky  as  Dirk  Gently,  in his
flapping leather coat, approached  the great iron portals  which led  to
the hotel,  and  to the  great vaulted train shed of St Pancras station.
Stone figures of winged dogs crouched down from the top of pillars. 
   Here, in the bridged  area between the hotel entrance and the station
booking hall,  was  parked  a large unmarked grey Mercedes van. A  quick
glance at the front of it was enough to  tell Dirk that it was the  same
one  which had nearly  forced him off the  road several hours earlier in
the Cotswolds. 
   Dirk walked into the booking hall,  a large space with great panelled
walls  along  which were spaced fat marble  columns in the form of torch
holders. 
   At this time of night  the ticket office was closed  -- trains do not
run  all night from St Pancras -- and  beyond it the vast chamber of the
station  itself,  the  great  Victorian  train  shed,  was  shrouded  in
darkness and shadow. 
   Dirk stood quietly secluded  in the entrance to  the booking hall and
watched as the old  tramps  and bag ladies, who  had entered the station
by the  main  entrance  from  the forecourt,  mingled  together  in  the
dimness.  There were  now many more than two dozen of  them,  perhaps as
many  as  a  hundred,  and  there  seemed  to be  about them  an air  of
repressed excitement and tension. 
   As they moved about it  seemed to Dirk  after a while that, though he
had  been surprised at  how many  of them there  had  been when he first
arrived, there seemed now to be fewer and  fewer of them. He peered into
the  gloom  trying to  make out what was  happening. He detached himself
from his seclusion in  the  entrance to the booking hall and entered the
main vault, but kept himself nevertheless  as close  to the side wall as
possible as he ventured in towards them. 
   There  were definitely fewer  still of them now, a mere handful left.
He had  a  distinct sense  of people slipping away into the shadows  and
not re-emerging from them. 
   He frowned at them. 
   The  shadows were  deep but they weren’t that deep. He began to hurry
forward,  and  quickly  threw  all  caution  aside to  reach  the  small
remaining group. But by the time he  reached the centre of the concourse
where they had been  gathered there were none  remaining  at  all and he
was left whirling round in confusion in the  middle of the great,  dark,
empty railway station. 
   
   
[::: CHAPTER 26 :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::]
   
   The  only thing which prevented Kate screaming was the sheer pressure
of air rushing into her lungs as she hurtled into the sky. 
   When, a few seconds later, the blinding  acceleration eased a little,
she  found  she  was gulping and choking, her  eyes  were  stinging  and
streaming  to the extent that she could hardly see, and there was hardly
a muscle in her  body which wasn’t gibbering  with shock as waves of air
pummelled past  her,  tearing  at  her hair and  clothes and  making her
knees, knuckles and teeth batter at each other. 
   She  had to struggle with herself to suppress  her urge to  struggle.
On the one hand  she absolutely certainly did not  want to be let go of.
Insofar  as she  had any  understanding at all of what was happening  to
her  she knew that  she did not want to be let go of.  On the other hand
the physical shock of  it  was facing  some stiff  competition from  her
sheer affronted  rage  at  being  suddenly hauled into  the  sky without
warning. The  result  of this was that she  struggled rather  feebly and
was angry at herself for doing  so. She ended up clinging to  Thor’s arm
in the most abject and undignified way. 
   The night was dark, and  the blessing of this, she supposed, was that
she could not see the ground.  The  lights she  had seen dotted here and
there in the  distance now swung  sickeningly away beneath her, but  her
instincts would not  identify them as representing ground.  Already  the
flickering beacons which shone  from the insanely turreted building  she
had glimpsed  seconds  before this outrage occurred  were  swaying  away
behind her now at an increasing distance. 
   They were still ascending. 
   She could not struggle, she  could  not speak. She could probably, if
she tried, bite the stupid  brute’s arm, but she contented herself  with
the idea of this rather than the actual deed. 
   The  air was  bad and  rasped  in her  lungs. Her nose and  eyes were
streaming,  and this made  it impossible for her to  look forward.  When
she did  try it,  just  once, she caught a momentary blurred  glimpse of
the  head  of the hammer streaking out  through  the dark  air  ahead of
them,  of  Thor’s  arm  grasping  its stunted  handle and  being  pulled
forward by it. His other  arm was gripped around her waist. The strength
of him defied her imagination but did not  make her  any the less angry.
   She got  the feeling that  they were  now skimming along just beneath
the  clouds.  Every  now  and  then  they  would  be  buffeted  by  damp
clamminess, and breathing would become yet harder  and more noxious. The
wet air tasted bitter,  and  deadly  cold,  and her  streaming  wet hair
lashed and slammed about her face. 
   She decided  that the  cold was  definitely  going  to kill her,  and
after  a  while  was   convinced   that   she  was  beginning   to  lose
consciousness. In  fact  she  realised she  was actually trying to  lose
consciousness  but she  couldn’t.  Time slipped into  a greyness though,
and she was less aware of how much of it was passing. 
   At last she began to  sense that they were slowing and that they were
beginning  to  curve back downwards.  This precipitated  fresh waves  of
nausea and  disorientation in  her,  and she felt that  her stomach  was
being slowly turned through a mangle. 
   The  air was, if  anything, getting  worse. It  smelled worse, tasted
more  acrid  and seemed to be getting a great  deal more turbulent. They
were definitely slowing now, and  the going was becoming  more  and more
difficult. The  hammer was clearly pointing  downwards now,  and finding
its way along rather than surging ahead. 
   Down still  further they went, battling through the thickening clouds
that swirled  round them till it seemed that they must now reach all the
way down to the ground. 
   Their speed  had dropped to the  point  where Kate  felt able to look
ahead now, though the acridity  of  the air  was such  that she was only
able to  manage a  very  brief glance. In the moment  that she  glanced,
Thor released the hammer. She couldn’t  believe it.  He released it only
for a fraction of a  second, just  to change his  grip on the  thing, so
that  they were  now hanging  from the  shaft as it flew slowly forward,
rather  than  being pulled along by it.  As  he redistributed his weight
into this new posture he hoisted Kate  firmly upwards as if pulling up a
sock. Down they went, and down further and further. 
   There was now  a roaring crashing  sound borne in on them by the wind
from up ahead, and suddenly  Thor was running, leaping over rocky, sandy
scrubland,  dancing through the knotted tussocks,  and  finally pounding
and drumming his feet to a halt. 
   They stood  still  at  last, swaying,  but the  ground on which  they
stood was solid. 
   Kate  breathed for a  few seconds, bending over to  catch her breath.
She then pulled herself up to  her full height and  was about to deliver
a full account of her feelings concerning  these  events at  the top  of
her voice,  when she  suddenly got an  alarming sense  of  where she was
standing. 
   Though the night was dark, the  wind whipping  at her and the pungent
smell of it told her that  some kind of sea was very close by. The sound
of wild  crashing breakers  told her  that in fact it was  more  or less
beneath her, that they were standing very near to the  edge  of a cliff.
She  gripped the  arm of the  insufferable god who  had brought her here
and hoped, vainly, that it hurt him. 
   As  her reeling  senses began gradually to calm down she noticed that
there  was a dim light spreading away before her, and after  a while she
realised that this was coming off the sea. 
   The  whole  sea was glowing  like an infection. It was rearing itself
up in  the night, lunging and thrashing in a turmoil  of itself and then
smashing itself to  pieces in  a frenzy of pain against the rocks of the
coast. Sea and sky seethed at each other in a poisonous fury. 
   Kate watched it speechlessly, and then became  aware of Thor standing
at her shoulder. 
   ‘I met  you at  an  airport,’  he  said, his voice breaking up in the
wind. ‘I was  trying  to get home to Norway by plane.’ He pointed out to
sea. ‘I wanted you to see why I couldn’t come this way.’ 
   ‘Where are we? What is this?’ asked Kate fearfully. 
   ‘In your world,  this is the North  Sea,’ said Thor and  turned  away
inland again, walking heavily and dragging his hammer behind him. 
   Kate pulled her wet coat close around her and hurried after him. 
   ‘Well, why  didn’t you just fly  home the way  we  just did  but  in,
well, in our world?’ 
   The rage in her had subsided into vague worries about vocabulary. 
   ‘I tried,’ responded Thor, still walking away. 
   ‘Well, what happened?’ 
   ‘I don’t want to talk about it.’ 
   ‘What on earth’s the point of that?’ 
   ‘I’m not going to discuss it.’ 
   Kate  shuddered  in  exasperation.  ‘Is this  godlike behaviour?’ she
shouted. ‘It bothers you so you won’t talk about it?’ 
   ‘Thor! Thor! Is it you?’ 
   This last  was a thin voice trailing over  the wind. Kate peered into
the  wind. Through  the darkness a lantern was bobbing towards them from
behind a low rise. 
   ‘Is  that you, Thor?’ A little  old  lady came into  view,  holding a
lantern above her head, hobbling  enthusiastically. ‘I thought that must
be  your  hammer  I  saw. Welcome!’ she  chirruped. ‘Oh, but you come in
dismal times.  I was  just putting  the  pot on and thinking of having a
cup  of  something  and then perhaps killing myself,  but then I said to
myself,  just wait  a  couple  of days  longer,  Tsuliwa..., Tsuwila...,
Swuli..., Tsuliwaënsis --  I can  never pronounce my  own  name properly
when I’m talking to  myself,  and  it drives me hopping mad, as I’m sure
you can imagine, such  a bright  boy as  I’ve  always  maintained, never
mind  what those others say, so I said  to  myself, Tsuliwaënsis, see if
anyone comes  along, and if they don’t, well, then might be a  good time
to think about killing myself. And  look!  Now here you are! Oh, but you
are welcome, welcome!  And I see you’ve brought a little friend. Are you
going to  introduce me? Hello,  my  dear, hello!  My name’s Tsuliwaënsis
and I won’t be at all offended if you stutter.’ 
   ‘I...I’m, er, Kate,’ said Kate, totally flummoxed. 
   ‘Yes,  well  I’m sure  that will  be all right,’  said the  old woman
sharply. ‘Anyway, come along if you’re  coming. If you’re going  to hang
around  out  here all  night  I may  as  well just get straight  on with
killing  myself now  and  let  you  get your  own tea when you’re  quite
ready. Come along!’ 
   She hurried  on  ahead,  and  in  a very  few yards  they  reached  a
terrible kind  of  ramshackle structure of  wood and mud which looked as
if it  had become unaccountably stuck while half-way through collapsing.
Kate glanced  at Thor, hoping to read some  kind of reaction from him to
give her a  bearing on the  situation, but he  was occupied with his own
thoughts and was clearly not about  to  share them. There seemed  to her
to be  a difference in the way he moved, though. In the brief experience
she had of him he seemed constantly  to be struggling with some internal
and constrained anger, and this,  she felt,  had lifted. Not  gone away,
just lifted.  He stood aside to allow her to enter Tsuliwaënsis’s shack,
and brusquely  gestured her to go  in.  He followed, ducking absurdly, a
few  seconds  later, having paused  for a  moment outside to survey what
little could be seen of the surrounding landscape. 
   Inside was  tiny.  A few boards with straw for a bed, a simmering pot
hung over a fire, and a box tucked away in the corner for sitting on. 
   ‘And  this  is the knife  I  was  thinking of  using, you  see,’ said
Tsuliwaënsis,  fussing around.  ‘Just  been sharpening it up nicely, you
see. It  comes up very nice  if you  get a nice sweeping action with the
stone, and I was thinking here  would be a good place, you see? Here  on
the wall, I can  stick  the  handle  in this crack so it’s held nice and
firm, and then just go  /fling!/ And fling  myself  at it. /Fling!/  You
see?  I wonder, should it be a little lower, what do you think, my dear?
Know about these things, do you?’ 
   Kate  explained  that  she did  not, and  managed to sound reasonably
calm about it. 
   ‘Tsuliwaënsis,’ said  Thor, ‘we have come not to stay  but to...Tsuli
-- please put the knife down.’ 
   Tsuliwaënsis was standing looking up at them  quite chirpily, but she
was also holding  the knife, with its great heavy sweeping blade, poised
over her own left wrist. 
   ‘Don’t mind me,  dears,’ she said, ‘I’m quite comfortable. I can just
pop  off any  time I’m ready. Happy to. These times are not to  live in.
Oh,  no. You go off  and be happy.  I won’t disturb your happiness  with
the sound  of me  screaming. I’ll  hardly make a sound with the knife as
you go.’ She stood quivering and challenging. 
   Carefully, almost  gently,  Thor reached out and drew  the knife away
and out of her shaking hand.  The  old  woman seemed  to  crumple  as it
went, and all the performance faded out  of her.  She sat back in a heap
on her  box. Thor squatted down in front  of her, slowly drew her to him
and  hugged  her.  She gradually  seemed  to  come  back  to  life,  and
eventually pushed him away  telling  him  not to  be so stupid, and then
made a bit  of a fuss of smoothing out her hopelessly  ragged  and dirty
black dress. 
   When once  she had composed herself properly she turned her attention
to Kate and looked her up and down. 
   ‘You’re a mortal, dear, aren’t you?’ she said at last. 
   ‘Well...yes,’ said Kate. 
   ‘I  can tell it from  your  fancy dress.  Oh, yes. Well, now you  see
what the world looks like  from the other side, don’t you, dear? What do
you think then?’ 
   Kate  explained  that  she did not yet know what  to think.  Thor sat
himself down on the floor and leant his big head back against  the wall,
half-closing his eyes. Kate had the sense that he  was preparing himself
for something. 
   ‘It  used to be things were  not  so  different,’  continued  the old
woman.  ‘Used to be lovely  here,  you know, all lovely. Bit of give and
take  between us. Terrible  rows, of course, terrible fights, but really
it was all lovely. Now?’ She let out a long and tired  sigh, and brushed
a bit of nothing much off the wall. 
   ‘Oh, things are bad,’  she said, ‘things are very bad. You see things
get  affected by  things. Our  world  affects  your  world,  your  world
affects  our world.  Sometimes it  is hard to  know  exactly  what  that
effect  is. Very  often it is hard to like  it,  either.  Most of  them,
these  days, are difficult  and  bad. But our worlds  are so nearly  the
same in so  many ways. Where  in  your world  you have a building  there
will be a  structure  here as  well.  Maybe  it  will  be a small  muddy
hillock, or a  beehive, or  an abode like  this  one. Maybe  it  will be
something  a little  grander, but it will be  something.  You all right,
Thor, dear?’ 
   The Thunder God closed  his  eyes and nodded.  His elbows lay  easily
across his knees.  The ragged strips of Kate’s nightgown bound about his
left forearm were limp and wet. He idly pushed them off. 
   ‘And where  there is  something which is  not  dealt with properly in
your world,’ the  old  lady  prattled on, ‘as like as not it will emerge
in  ours. Nothing disappears.  No guilty secret. No unspoken thought. It
may be a new and mighty god  in our world, or it may be just a gnat, but
it  will  be  here. I might add that these days it  is more often a gnat
than a new and mighty  god. Oh,  there are so  many more gnats and fewer
immortal gods than once there were.’ 
   ‘How can there be  fewer  immortals?’ asked Kate. ‘I don’t want to be
pedantic about it, but --’ 
   ‘Well, there’s  being  immortal, dear, and  then again there’s  being
immortal.  I mean, if I could just get  this knife properly secured  and
then  work up  a really good  fling,  we’d soon see who was immortal and
who wasn’t.’ 
   ‘Tsuli...’ admonished Thor, but didn’t open his eyes to do it. 
   ‘One by one we’re going, though. We are, Thor. You’re one of the  few
that care. There’s few enough  now that haven’t succumbed  to alcoholism
or the onx.’ 
   ‘What  is  that? Some kind of disease?’ asked Kate. She was beginning
to feel cross again. Having  been dragged unwillingly from her flat  and
hurled across  the whole  of East Anglia on the end of a hammer, she was
irritated  at  being  then  just abandoned  to  a conversation  with  an
insanely suicidal old woman while  Thor just sat and looked content with
himself, leaving her to make an effort she was not in a mood to make. 
   ‘It’s an affliction, dear,  which only gods get. It really means that
you can’t take being a  god any more, which is why only gods  get it you
see.’ 
   ‘I see.’ 
   ‘In the  final  stages of it you simply lie on the ground and after a
while a tree grows out of your head and  then it’s all  over. You rejoin
the earth, seep into its bowels,  flow through  its  vital arteries, and
eventually emerge  as a great  pure torrent of water, and as like as not
get  a load of chemical  waste  dumped  into you.  It’s  a grim business
being a god nowadays, even a dead god. 
   ‘Well,’ she  said,  patting her knees. Her eyes hovered  on Thor, who
had opened his eyes  but  was  only using  them  to  stare  at  his  own
knuckles and fingertips. ‘Well, I hear you have an  appointment tonight,
Thor.’ 
   ‘Hmm,’ grunted Thor, without moving. 
   ‘I  hear you’ve  called together the Great  Hall for  the Challenging
Hour, is that right?’ 
   ‘Hmm,’ said Thor. 
   ‘The Challenging Hour, hmm? Well,  I know that things have  not  been
too good between you and your father for a long time. Hmm?’ 
   Thor wasn’t going to be drawn. He said nothing. 
   ‘I   thought   it   was   quite   dreadful  about  Wales,’  continued
Tsuliwaënsis. ‘Don’t  know  why  you  stood for it.  Of course I realise
that he’s  your father and the All-Father which makes it difficult. But,
Odin, Odin -- I’ve known him  for so  long. You know that he made a deal
once to sacrifice  one of his own eyes in exchange for wisdom? Of course
you do, dear,  you’re  his son, aren’t  you? Well, what I’ve always said
is  he should  stand up  and  make  a fuss  about that  particular deal,
demand  his eye  back.  Do you know what  I mean by that, Thor? And that
horrible  Toe Rag. There’s someone to  be careful of, Thor, very careful
indeed. Well,  I expect I shall hear all about it in  the morning, won’t
I?’ 
   Thor  slid his  back  up  the  wall and  stood up. He clasped the old
woman  warmly by the hands and  smiled  a tight smile, but said nothing.
With  a slight nod he gestured to  Kate  that  they were  leaving. Since
leaving was what  she most wanted in all  the world to  do she  resisted
the temptation to say ‘Oh yeah?’ and kick  up a fuss about being treated
like  this. Meekly she bade  a polite farewell to the old woman and made
her way out into the murky night. Thor followed her. 
   She  folded  her arms and said,  ‘Well?  Where  now? What other great
social events have you got in store for me this evening?’ 
   Thor prowled around a  little,  examining  the  ground. He pulled out
his  hammer,  and weighed it appreciatively in  his hands. He peered out
into the night,  and swung the hammer a couple of  times, idly. He swung
himself round a couple of  times, again not hard.  He loosed the hammer,
which bounded off  into  the night and  split  open a  casually situated
rock a couple of dozen yards  away  and then bounded  back. He caught it
easily, tossed it up into the air and caught it easily again. 
   Then  he turned to her and looked  her in the eye for the first time.
   ‘Would you like to see something?’ he asked. 
   
   
[::: CHAPTER 27 :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::]
   
   A gust of wind  blew through the huge vaults of the empty station and
nearly provoked in  Dirk a  great howl of frustration at the  trail that
had  so  suddenly  gone  cold on him. The  cold  moonlight draped itself
through the long ranges of glass panels that extended the length of  the
St Pancras station roof. 
   It fell on empty rails,  and illuminated them. It  fell  on the train
departures board, it fell on the  sign which  explained that today was a
Blue Saver Day and illuminated them both. 
   Framed in the archway formed  by the far end of the vaulted roof were
the   fantastical  forms  of   five  great  gasometers,  the  supporting
superstructures  of which seemed  in  their  adumbrations  to be tangled
impossibly  with  each  other,  like  the  hoops  of  an   illusionist’s
conjuring  trick. The moonlight  illuminated  these as well, but Dirk it
did not illuminate. 
   He  had  watched upwards of a hundred people or so simply vanish into
thin air in a  way  that was  completely impossible. That in itself  did
not give him a problem. The  impossible did not bother him unduly. If it
could not possibly  be done, then obviously it had been done impossibly.
The question was how? 
   He  paced the area of the station  which they had all  vanished from,
and scanned  everything  that could be  seen  from every  vantage  point
within it,  looking for any clue, any  anomaly,  anything that might let
him pass  into whatever  it  was he had just seen  a hundred people pass
into  as if it was nothing. He had the  sense  of a major  party  taking
place  in the  near  vicinity, to  which  he  had  not  been invited. In
desperation he started to spin around with  his arms outstretched,  then
decided this was completely futile and lit a cigarette instead. 
   He noticed that  as  he  had pulled out the packet, a piece of  paper
had  fluttered from his pocket,  which,  once  the cigarette was burning
well, he stooped to retrieve. 
   It was nothing exciting,  just  the bill  he  had picked up  from the
stroppy nurse in the café. ‘Outrageous,’  he thought  about each of  the
items in turn as  he scanned down them, and was about to screw it up and
throw it away when a thought  struck him about the general layout of the
document. 
   The  items  charged  were listed  down  the  left hand side,  and the
actual charges down the right. 
   On his  own  bills when he issued them,  when he  had a client, which
was rare at the moment, and  the ones he  did have seemed unable to stay
alive long enough  to  receive  his  bills  and be  outraged by them, he
usually  went   to  a   little  trouble  about  the  items  charged.  He
constructed  essays,  little paragraphs  to describe them. He  liked the
client to  feel that he or she  was getting his or her money’s  worth in
this respect at least. 
   In short, the  bills he  issued corresponded in layout almost exactly
to  the  wad  of papers with indecipherable runic  scripts  which he had
been unable  to make head or tail of a couple  of  hours previously. Was
that helpful? He didn’t know. If  the wad was not a contract but a bill,
what might it be the bill  for? What services  had  been performed? They
must certainly have been  intricate  services.  Or at least, intricately
described services. Which  professions  might that apply  to?  It was at
least something  to think about. He screwed up the café  bill  and moved
off to throw it into a bin. 
   As it happened, this was a fortuitous move. 
   It meant  that he  was  away  from  the  central open  space  of  the
station,  and  near  a  wall  against  which  he   could  press  himself
inconspicuously when he  suddenly  heard  the sound of two pairs of feet
crossing the forecourt outside. 
   In a few  seconds,  they  entered  the main  part of  the station, by
which time Dirk was well out of sight round the angle of a wall. 
   Being well out of  sight worked less well for him in another respect,
which was that for a while he was unable to see  the owners of the feet.
By the  time he caught a  glimpse of them,  they had reached exactly the
same area  where a few minutes  previously a small horde  of people had,
quietly and without fuss, vanished. 
   He was surprised by the  red spectacles of the woman  and the quietly
tailored  Italian  suit of the  man,  and also the speed with which they
themselves then immediately vanished. 
   Dirk stood  speechless. The  same two  damn people who  had  been the
bane  of  his life  for the entire  day (he allowed himself  this slight
exaggeration on  the grounds of extreme provocation) had now  flagrantly
and deliberately disappeared in front of his eyes. 
   Once  he  was  quite  certain  that  they had  absolutely  definitely
vanished  and were not  merely hiding behind each other, he ventured out
once more into the mysterious space. 
   It  was  bafflingly  ordinary.  Ordinary  tarmacadam,  ordinary  air,
ordinary everything. And yet  a quantity  of people that would have kept
the  Bermuda  triangle  industry  happy for  an entire  decade  had just
vanished in it within the space of five minutes. 
   He was deeply aggravated. 
   He was so deeply aggravated that  he thought he would share the sense
of  aggravation  by  phoning  someone up and aggravating  them  -- as it
would be almost certain to do at twenty past one in the morning. 
   This  wasn’t  an entirely  arbitrary  thought -- he was still anxious
concerning  the safety of the American girl, Kate Schechter, and had not
been at  all reassured to have been answered by her machine when last he
had  called. By now she should surely be at home and  in bed asleep, and
would be reassuringly livid  to be  woken  by a  meddling phone  call at
this time. 
   He found a couple of coins  and a working  telephone  and dialled her
number. He got her answering machine again. 
   It said that  she had  just out  for the night to Asgard. She  wasn’t
certain which  parts  of  Asgard they  were  going  to  but  they  would
probably  swing by Valhalla  later,  if the evening was up to it.  If he
cared to leave  a  message she would deal with it in the morning  if she
was still  alive and in  the mood. There  were some beeps, which rang on
in Dirk’s ear for seconds after he heard them. 
   ‘Oh,’ he said, realising  that the machine was currently  busy taping
him,  ‘good  heavens. Well, I thought the arrangement was that  you were
going to call me before doing anything impossible.’ 
   He put the phone down, his head spinning  angrily.  Valhalla, eh? Was
that where  everybody was going to tonight  except  him?  He had  a good
mind to go home, go to bed and wake up in the grocery business. 
   Valhalla. 
   He looked about  him once again,  with  the name  Valhalla ringing in
his ears. There was  no doubt, he  felt,  that a  space this  size would
make a good feasting  hall for gods  and dead heroes, and that the empty
Midland  Grand  Hotel would  be  almost  worth  moving the  shebang from
Norway for. 
   He wondered  if it made any  difference knowing what it was you  were
walking into. 
   Nervously,  tentatively, he  walked across  and through  the space in
question.  Nothing. Oh well. He  turned,  and stood  surveying it  for a
moment or  two while he took a couple of slow drags on the  cigarette he
had got from the tramp. The space didn’t look any different. 
   He   walked  back  through  it  again,  this  time   a  little   less
tentatively,  but   with  slow  positive  steps.  Once   again,  nothing
happened, but then just as he  was moving out  of it at the  end he half
fancied that he half heard  a half moment of some kind of raucous sound,
like a burst  of  white noise on  a  twisted radio dial. He turned  once
more, and  headed  back  into the space, moving his head carefully round
trying to pick up  the slightest sound. For a while he didn’t  catch it,
then suddenly  there was a snatch of it  that  burst around  him and was
gone. A  movement and another  snatch.  He moved very,  very slowly  and
carefully. With  the most  slight and gentle  movements, trying to catch
at the  sound he moved his head round what seemed like a  billionth part
of  a billionth part  of  a degree, slipped  behind a molecule  and  was
gone. 
   He had  instantly to duck  to avoid a great eagle swooping out of the
vast space at him. 
   
   
[::: CHAPTER 28 :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::]
   
   It  was  another  eagle,  a  different  eagle.  The next  one  was  a
different eagle too,  and  the  next.  The air  seemed to be  thick with
eagles,  and  it  was  obviously  impossible  to  enter Valhalla without
getting swooped  on  by at least half a dozen of them. Even  eagles were
being swooped on by eagles. 
   Dirk  threw up his arms over his head to fend off  the wild,  beating
flurries,  turned, tripped  and fell down behind a huge table  on  to  a
floor of  heavy, damp, earthy straw. His  hat rolled under the table. He
scrambled after  it,  stuffed it back  firmly on  his head,  and  slowly
peered up over the table. 
   The hall was dark, but alive with great bonfires. 
   Noise and woodsmoke  filled the air, and the smells of roasting pigs,
roasting  sheep,  roasting boar, and sweat and  reeking wine  and singed
eagle wings. 
   The table he  was crouched  behind was one of countless slabs of  oak
on  trestles  that stretched  in  every direction, laden  with  steaming
hunks  of  dead animals,  huge  breads, great iron beakers slopping with
wine and  candles like  wax  anthills. Massive  sweaty  figures  seethed
around  them,  on  them,  eating,  drinking,  fighting  over  the  food,
fighting in the food, fighting with the food. 
   A yard or so  from  Dirk, a warrior  was standing  on top of a  table
fighting  a  pig  which  had  been  roasting for  six  hours, and he was
clearly losing, but losing  with vim and spirit  and being cheered on by
other warriors who were dousing him down with wine from a trough. 
   The roof -- as  much of it as could be made out at this distance, and
by the dark and  flickering light of the bonfires -- was made of lashed-
together shields. 
   Dirk clutched his hat, kept his  head down and  ran, trying  to  make
his way towards the side of the hall. As he  ran, feeling himself  to be
virtually  invisible by reason of being completely sober and, by his own
lights, normally  dressed,  he seemed to  pass examples of every form of
bodily function imaginable, other than actual teeth-cleaning. 
   The smell,  like that of the tramp  in King’s Cross station, who must
surely be here participating, was one that never stopped  coming at you.
It  grew  and  grew  until it seemed that your head had to become bigger
and  bigger  to accommodate  it.  The din  of sword  on sword, sword  on
shield, sword  on flesh, flesh on flesh  was one that made  the eardrums
reel and  quiver and  want to cry.  He was pummelled, tripped,  elbowed,
shoved  and  drenched  with  wine as he scurried and  pushed through the
wild throng, but arrived at  last at  a side wall  --  massive slabs  of
wood and stone faced with sheets of stinking cow hide. 
   Panting, he stopped for a  moment, looked back and surveyed the scene
with amazement. 
   It was Valhalla. 
   Of  that  there  would  be  absolutely  no  question.  This  was  not
something that could be  mocked up by a catering company. And the  whole
seething, wild mass  of carousing  gods and warriors and their caroused-
at  ladies, with  their shields and fires and boars  did seem  to fill a
space  that  must  be  something  approaching the  size  of  St  Pancras
station. The  sheer heat that rose  off  it  all seemed as if it  should
suffocate the flocks of deranged  eagles which thrashed through the  air
above them. 
   And maybe  it was. He was by no means certain that a flock of enraged
eagles  which  thought  that  they  might be  suffocating  would  behave
significantly  differently  from  many of  the  eagles  he was currently
watching. 
   There  was something he  had been putting off  wondering while he had
fought his way  through  the mass, but  the time had  come to wonder  it
now. 
   What, he wondered, about the Draycotts? 
   What could the Draycotts possibly  be doing here?  And where, in such
a mêlée, could the Draycotts possibly be? 
   He narrowed his eyes  and peered into  the heaving  throng, trying to
see  if he could locate anywhere a pair of red  designer spectacles or a
quiet Italian  suit mingling  out  there with the  clanging breastplates
and  the  sweaty leathers,  knowing  that  the attempt  was  futile  but
feeling that it should be made. 
   No,  he decided, he couldn’t see  them. Not, he  felt, their kind  of
party. Further reflections along these lines  were cut  short by a heavy
short-handled axe which hurtled through the air and  buried  itself with
an  astounding thud in the wall about three inches from his left ear and
for a moment blotted out all thought. 
   When he recovered from the  shock of it, and let  his breath out,  he
thought that  it was probably not something that had been thrown  at him
with   malicious   intent,  but   was  merely  warriorly  high  spirits.
Nevertheless, he was not in a  partying mood and decided to move on.  He
edged  his way along the wall  in the direction which, had this actually
been St Pancras  station  rather  than the hall of Valhalla, would  have
led to the  ticket office. He didn’t  know what he would find there, but
he reckoned that it must be different to this, which would be good. 
   It seemed to him that things were generally quieter here, out on  the
periphery. 
   The biggest  and  best of the good  times  seemed  to be concentrated
more strongly towards  the middle of the hall, whereas the tables he was
passing  now seemed to be peopled with  those who looked as if  they had
reached  that season  in  their  immortal lives  when  they preferred to
contemplate the times when they used to wrestle dead pigs,  and to  pass
appreciative comments to each other about  the finer points  of dead pig
wrestling technique, than actually to wrestle  with one again themselves
just at the moment. 
   He overheard one remark to his  companion that it was the left-handed
three-fingered  flat  grip  on  the  opponent’s  sternum that  was  all-
important at  the crucial moment of finally not  quite falling over in a
complete  stupor,  to  which  his companion responded with a  benign ‘Oh
ah.’ 
   Dirk stopped, looked and backtracked. 
   Sitting  hunched in a thoughtful  posture  over  his iron plate,  and
clad  in  heavily  stained and matted furs  and  buckles which  were, if
anything,  more rank  and  stinking  than the  ensemble  Dirk  had  last
encountered  him  in, was Dirk’s companion  from the concourse at King’s
Cross station. 
   Dirk wondered how to approach him. A quick backslap and  a ‘Hey! Good
party.  Lot  of  energy,’ was one strategy, but Dirk didn’t think it was
the right one. 
   While  he was wondering,  an eagle suddenly swooped  down from out of
the air and, with  a lot of  beating and  thrashing, landed on the table
in  front  of  the  old man,  folded  its  wings  and  advanced on  him,
demanding  to  be fed.  Easily, the old man pulled a bit of  meat off  a
bone  and held it up  to  the great bird,  which pecked  it  sharply but
accurately out of his fingers. 
   Dirk  thought that this was the key to a  friendly approach. He leant
over the table  and  picked up  a small hunk of meat  and offered it  in
turn  to the  bird. The bird attacked him and went for his neck, forcing
him  to  try  and  beat the  savage creature  off  with his hat, but the
introduction was made. 
   ‘Oh  ah,’ said the man, shooed the eagle away and shifted a couple of
inches along the bench. Though it was not  a fulsome  invitation, it was
at least an invitation. Dirk clambered over the bench and sat down. 
   ‘Thank you,’ said Dirk, puffing. 
   ‘Oh ah.’ 
   ‘If you remember, we --’ 
   At that moment the most  tremendous reverberating thump  sounded  out
across  Valhalla.  It  was the  sound of a  drum  being beaten,  but  it
sounded  like a  drum of immense proportions, as  it had to be  to  make
itself heard over the  tumult of  noise with which the hall  was filled.
The  drum sounded  three  times,  in  slow  and massive  beats, like the
heartbeat of the hall itself. 
   Dirk  looked  up to see where the sound  might  have  come  from.  He
noticed  for the first time that at the south end  of the hall, to which
he had been  heading,  a great balcony or bridge extended across most of
its  width. There were  some figures up there, dimly visible through the
heat  haze  and the eagles, but  Dirk  had  a sense  that whoever was up
there presided over whoever was down here. 
   Odin, thought Dirk. Odin the All-Father must be up on the balcony. 
   The sound  of  the  revels  died down quickly, though it was  several
seconds before the reverberations of the noise finally fell away. 
   When all was quiet,  but expectant, a great voice rang  out  from the
balcony and through the hall. 
   The voice said, ‘The  time  of the Challenging Hour is  nearly  at an
end. The Challenging  Hour  has been called  by the  God  Thor. For  the
third time of asking, where is Thor?’ 
   A  murmuring throughout  the hall  suggested  that nobody  knew where
Thor was and why he had not come to make his challenge. 
   The voice said, ‘This is a very grave affront  to the  dignity of the
All-Father. If there is no challenge before the expiration of the  hour,
the penalty for Thor shall be correspondingly grave.’ 
   The drum  beat  again three times, and the consternation in the  hall
increased. Where was Thor? 
   ‘He’s with  some  girl,’ said a voice above the rest, and  there were
loud shouts of laughter, and a return to the hubbub of before. 
   ‘Yes.’ said Dirk, quietly, ‘I expect he probably is.’ 
   ‘Oh ah.’ 
   Dirk  had supposed that he was talking to himself  and was  surprised
to have  elicited  a  response  from the  man,  though not  particularly
surprised at the response that had been elicited. 
   ‘Thor called this meeting tonight?’ Dirk asked him. 
   ‘Oh ah.’ 
   ‘Bit rude not to turn up.’ 
   ‘Oh ah.’ 
   ‘I expect everyone’s a bit upset.’ 
   ‘Not as long as there’s enough pigs to go round.’ 
   ‘Pigs?’ 
   ‘Oh ah.’ 
   Dirk didn’t immediately know how to go on from here. 
   ‘Oh ah,’ he said, resignedly. 
   ‘It’s only Thor as really cares, you  see,’ said  the old man. ‘Keeps
on issuing his  challenge, then not being able to prove it. Can’t argue.
Gets all confused and  angry,  does something stupid, can’t sort  it out
and  gets  made  to do a  penance.  Everybody else just turns up for the
pigs.’ 
   ‘Oh  ah.’ Dirk was  learning a whole new conversational technique and
was astonished  at how successful it  was. He  regarded the  man with  a
new-found respect. 
   ‘Do  you  know  how many  stones there  are in Wales?’ asked the  man
suddenly. 
   ‘Oh ah,’ said Dirk warily. He didn’t know this joke. 
   ‘Nor do I.  He won’t  tell anybody.  Says count ‘em yourself and goes
off in a sulk.’ 
   ‘Oh ah.’ He didn’t think it was a very good one. 
   ‘So  this  time he  hasn’t even turned up. Can’t say I blame him. But
I’m sorry, because I think he might be right.’ 
   ‘Oh ah.’ 
   The man lapsed into silence. 
   Dirk waited. 
   ‘Oh ah,’ he said again, hopefully. 
   Nothing. 
   ‘So, er,’  said Dirk,  going  for a cautious  prompt,  ‘you  think he
might be right, eh?’ 
   ‘Oh ah.’ 
   ‘So. Old Thor might be right, eh? That’s the story,’ said Dirk. 
   ‘Oh ah.’ 
   ‘In  what way,’ said Dirk,  running out of  patience at last, ‘do you
think he might be right?’ 
   ‘Oh, every way.’ 
   ‘Oh ah,’ said Dirk, defeated. 
   ‘It’s no secret  that the gods  have fallen  on hard times,’ said the
old man,  grimly. ‘That’s  clear for all  to see, even for  the ones who
only  care  about  the  pigs, which is  most of  ‘em. And  when you feel
you’re not needed  any more it can be hard to think beyond the next pig,
even if you used to have the whole world  there with you.  Everyone just
accepts it as inevitable. Everyone  except Thor,  that is. And  now he’s
given  up.  Hasn’t even bothered  to  turn up and  break  a pig with us.
Given up his challenge. Oh ah.’ 
   ‘Oh ah,’ said Dirk. 
   ‘Oh ah.’ 
   ‘So, er, Thor’s challenge then,’ said Dirk tentatively. 
   ‘Oh ah.’ 
   ‘What was it?’ 
   ‘Oh ah.’ 
   Dirk lost his patience entirely and rounded on the man. 
   ‘What was Thor’s challenge to Odin?’ he insisted angrily. 
   The man looked round at  him in slow surprise, looked him up and down
with his big sagging eyes. 
   ‘You’re a mortal, aren’t you?’ 
   ‘Yes,’  said  Dirk testily,  ‘I’m a mortal. Of  course  I’m a mortal.
What has being a mortal got to do with it?’ 
   ‘How did you get here?’ 
   ‘I  followed you.’ He pulled the  screwed  up, empty cigarette packet
out of his pocket  and  put it on  the table. ‘Thanks,’ he said, ‘I  owe
you.’ 
   It was  a  pretty feeble type of apology,  he thought, but it was the
best he could manage. 
   ‘Oh ah.’ The man looked away. 
   ‘What was Thor’s  challenge  to Odin?’ said Dirk, trying hard to keep
the impatience out of his voice this time. 
   ‘What  does  it  matter  to you?’  the  old  immortal said  bitterly.
‘You’re a mortal. Why  should you care? You’ve got what you want  out of
it, you and your kind, for what little it’s now worth.’ 
   ‘Got what we want out of what?’ 
   ‘The  deal,’ said  the old  immortal. ‘The  contract that Thor claims
Odin has entered into.’ 
   ‘Contract?’ said Dirk. ‘What contract?’ 
   The man’s face filled with an expression of  slow anger. The bonfires
of Valhalla danced deeply in his eyes as he looked at Dirk. 
   ‘The sale,’ he said darkly, ‘of an immortal soul.’ 
   ‘What?’  said  Dirk.  He  had  already  considered   this   idea  and
discounted it. ‘You mean  a  man has  sold his soul to him? What man? It
doesn’t make sense.’ 
   ‘No,’ said  the man, ‘that  wouldn’t  make sense  at all.  I said  an
immortal soul. Thor says that Odin has sold his soul to Man.’ 
   Dirk stared at  him  with horror  and then slowly raised his  eyes to
the balcony.  Something was  happening  there. The  great drum beat  out
again, and the  hall of  Valhalla began to hush itself once more.  But a
second or third  drumbeat failed to come. Something unexpected seemed to
have occurred, and  the  figures  on the  balcony  were moving  in  some
confusion. The  Challenging Hour was just expiring, but a  challenge  of
some kind seemed to have arrived. 
   Dirk beat his palms  to his forehead and swayed where he  sat  as all
kinds of realisations finally dawned on him. 
   ‘Not to Man,’  he  said, ‘but to a man,  and a woman. A lawyer and an
advertiser. I  said it  was all her fault the moment I saw her. I didn’t
realise  I  might  actually  be  right.’  He  rounded  on  his companion
urgently.  ‘I have to get up there,’ he said, ‘for Gods’ sake, help me.’
   
   
[::: CHAPTER 29 :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::]
   
   ‘O...ddddiiiiiiinnnnnn!!!!!’ 
   Thor let out a bellow  of rage  which made the  sky shake. The  heavy
clouds let out a surprised  grunt of thunder at  the sheer volume of air
that moved beneath them. Kate  started back, white  with fear and shock,
with her ears ringing. 
   ‘Toe /Rag/!!!!!!’ 
   He hurled his  hammer  to the ground right at his very feet with both
hands. He  hurled it this short distance with such astounding force that
it hit and rebounded into the air up to about a hundred feet. 
   ‘Ggggrrrraaaaaaaaah!!!!!!’ With an immense explosion of air from  his
lungs he hurled  himself up into the  air after it, caught it just as it
was beginning to drop, and  hurled  it  straight back down at the ground
again, catching  it  again  as it bounded back  up,  twisting  violently
round  in mid-air and hurling it  with all the force he could muster out
to sea before falling to  the ground himself on  his back,  and pounding
the earth with his ankles, elbows  and fists in an incredible tattoo  of
rage. 
   The hammer shot out over the sea  on a very low trajectory. The  head
went down into  the water and planed through it  at a constant depth  of
about six inches.  A sharp ripple opened  slowly but  easily across  its
surface, extending eventually to about a mile as  the hammer sliced  its
way through it  like  a surgeon’s  knife.  The inner walls of the ripple
deepened smoothly in its wake, falling away from the sheer force  of the
hammer, till a vast valley had opened in the face of the  sea. The walls
of  the  valley  wobbled  and swayed uncertainly,  then  folded  up  and
crashed together  in  crazed  and foaming  tumult. The hammer lifted its
head  and swung up high into the air. Thor leapt to his feet and watched
it, still  pounding  his feet on the  ground like a  boxer, but  like  a
boxer who was  perhaps about to precipitate a major earthquake. When the
hammer  reached  the  top  of  its  trajectory,  Thor  hurled  his  fist
downwards  like  a conductor,  and  the  hammer  hurtled  down  into the
crashing mass of sea. 
   That  seemed  to calm  the  sea  for a moment in the same way that  a
smack in the face will calm a hysteric.  The moment  passed.  An immense
column of  water erupted out of the smack,  and seconds later the hammer
exploded  upwards out of  its centre,  pulling  another huge  column  of
water up from the middle of the first one. 
   The  hammer  somersaulted  at the top of  its rise, turned, spun, and
rushed back to  its owner like  a wildly over-excited puppy. Thor caught
at it, but instead of stopping it  he allowed it to carry him backwards,
and together  they  tumbled back through  the rocks for about  a hundred
yards and scuffled to a halt in some soft earth. 
   Instantly, Thor  was back  on  his feet again.  He  turned  round and
round, bounding from one leg to the other with  strides  of  nearly  ten
feet,  swinging the hammer  round  him at arm’s length. When he released
it again  it raced out to sea once more, but this time it tore round the
surface in  a  giant semicircle, causing  the sea to  rear up around its
circumference to  form for  a  moment a gigantic  amphitheatre of water.
When it  fell  forward  it  crashed  like  a tidal wave, ran forward and
threw itself, enraged, against the short wall of the cliff. 
   The  hammer returned to Thor,  who  threw it off again instantly in a
great  overarm.  It flew into a rock, hitting off  a fat angry spark. It
bounded off further and hit a  spark off another rock, and another. Thor
threw himself  forward on to his knees,  and  with each  rock the hammer
hit he pounded the  ground with  his fist to  make the rock rise to meet
the  hammer.  Spark after spark  erupted from the rocks. The hammer  hit
each  successive one  harder  and  harder, until  one spark  provoked  a
warning lick of lightning from the clouds. 
   And  then  the sky began to move, slowly,  like a  great angry animal
uncoiling in its lair. The pounding sparks flew faster and  heavier from
the hammer, more lightning  licks  arced down to meet them from the sky,
and  the whole earth was  beginning  to tremble  in something  very like
fearful excitement. 
   Thor  hauled his elbows  up above his head and  then thrust them hard
down with another ringing bellow at the sky. 
   ‘O...ddddiiiiiiinnnnnn!!!!!’ 
   The sky seemed about to crack open. 
   ‘Toe Raaaaagggggggg!!!!!!!!’ 
   Thor throw himself into the ground, heaving  aside about two skipsful
of  rocky earth.  He  shook  with expanding  rage. With a deep groan the
whole of the  side  of the  cliff began slowly  to lean forward into the
sea  as  he pushed and shook. In a  few  seconds more it tumbled heavily
into  the seething  torment beneath it as Thor clambered  back, seized a
rock the size of a grand piano and held it above his head. 
   Everything seemed still for a fleeting moment. 
   Thor hurled the rock into the sea. 
   He regained his hammer. 
   ‘O...!’ he bellowed. 
   ‘...Ddddddddinnnnnnnnnn!!!!!!!!!!’ 
   His hammer cracked down. 
   A torrent  of  water erupted from the  ground, and  the sky exploded.
Lightning flickered down like a white wall of light for  miles along the
coast in  either direction. Thunder roared like colliding worlds and the
clouds  vomited rain that  shattered the ground. Thor  stood exulting in
the torrent. 
   A few  minutes  later and  the violence abated. A  strong and  steady
rain continued to fall. The clouds  were  cleansing  themselves  and the
weak rays  of the  early morning light  began to  find their way through
the thinning cover. 
   Thor  trudged  back up from  where he had been standing, slapping and
washing  the mud from his hands. He caught at his hammer when it flew to
him. 
   He found  Kate standing  watching him,  shivering  with astonishment,
fear and fury. 
   ‘What was /that/ all about?’ she yelled at him. 
   ‘I just needed to be able  to lose my temper properly,’ he said. When
this didn’t  seem to satisfy her he added, ‘A god can show off once in a
while can’t he?’ 
   The huddled  figure of Tsuliwaënsis  came hurrying  out  through  the
rain towards them. 
   ‘You’re a noisy boy, Thor,’ she scolded, ‘a noisy boy.’ 
   But Thor was gone.  When they looked,  they guessed that  he must  be
the tiny speck hurtling northwards through the clearing sky. 
   
   
[::: CHAPTER 30 :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::]
   
   Cynthia Draycott  peered over the balcony  at  the  scene below  them
with distaste. Valhalla was back in full swing. 
   ‘I hate this,’ she said, ‘I don’t want this going on in my life.’ 
   ‘You don’t  have  to, my  darling,’  said Clive Draycott quietly from
behind  her,  with his hands on her  shoulders.  ‘It’s  all going to  be
taken care of  right now, and it’s going to work out just fine. Couldn’t
be better in  fact.  It’s  just  what  we  wanted.  You  know, you  look
fantastic in  those  glasses? They  really  suit  you.  I  mean  really.
They’re /very/ chic.’ 
   ‘Clive,  it  was meant to have  been  taken care  of originally.  The
whole point  was that we weren’t to  be troubled, we  could just  do it,
deal with it, and forget  about it. That  was the whole point. I’ve  put
up  with enough shit  in  my life. I just wanted  it to be good, 100 per
cent. I don’t want all this.’ 
   ‘Exactly.  And that’s why  this  is  so perfect  for us. So  perfect.
Clear breach of  contract. We get  everything we wanted  now, and  we’re
released  from all  obligations. Perfecto. We come out of it smelling of
roses, and we have a life that is just 100  per cent good. 100 per cent.
And clean. Just exactly as you wanted it. Really, it couldn’t be  better
for us. Trust me.’ 
   Cynthia Draycott hugged herself irritably. 
   ‘So what  about  this  new...person? Something  else  we have to deal
with.’ 
   ‘It’ll be so easy.  So  easy. Listen, this is nothing. We  either cut
him in to  it, or we cut him /right/ out. It’ll be taken care of  before
we leave here. We’ll buy him  something. A new coat. Maybe we’ll have to
buy  him  a  new house. Know what that’ll  cost us?’ He gave a  charming
laugh.  ‘It’s nothing.  You won’t ever even need to think about it.  You
won’t  ever   even   need   to  think  about  not  thinking   about  it.
It’s...that...easy. OK?’ 
   ‘Hm.’ 
   ‘OK. I’ll be right back.’ 
   He turned and  headed back into the ante-chamber of  the hall  of the
All-Father, smiling all the way. 
   ‘So, Mr...’ he made a show  of looking at  the card again ‘...Gently.
You want to act for these people do you?’ 
   ‘These immortal gods,’ said Dirk. 
   ‘OK, gods,’ said  Draycott. ‘That’s fine.  Perhaps you’ll do a better
job than  the  manic  little hustler I  had to deal with first time out.
You know, he’s really quite a  little character, our  Mr Rag,  Mr /Rag/.
You  know, that  guy was  really  quite  amazing.  He  did everything he
could, tried  every  oldest trick in the book  to freak me out, and give
me  the run-around. You know how I deal with people like that? Simple. I
ignore it.  I just...ignore it. If he  wants to play around and threaten
and screech, and shovel in five  hundred  and  seventeen subclauses that
he  thinks he’s going to catch me out on, that’s OK. He’s just taking up
time, but so what? I’ve  got  time.  I’ve got plenty of time for  people
like Mr Rag. Because you know what the really crazy  thing  is? You know
what’s  /really/  crazy?  The guy cannot draw up  an  actual contract to
save his life.  Really. To save...his...life.  And I tell you something,
that’s fine by me. He can  thrash  around and spit all  he likes -- when
he gets tired  I just  reel  him in. Listen. I draw up  contracts in the
record business. These  guys  are just  minnows  by comparison.  They’re
primitive savages.  You’ve  met  them. You’ve dealt  with them.  They’re
primitive savages. Well, aren’t they? Like the  Red Indians.  They don’t
even  know  what they’ve  got. You  know,  these  people  are lucky they
didn’t meet some real shark. I  mean it. You know what America cost? You
know what  the  whole  United States  of  America  actually  /cost/? You
don’t,  and  neither  do  I. And  shall I tell you  why?  The  sum is so
negligible that someone could  tell us what it was and two minutes later
we would have forgotten. It would have gone clean out of our minds. 
   ‘Now, compared with that,  let me tell  you, I am  /providing/. I  am
/really/ providing.  A private  suite in the  Woodshead Hospital? Lavish
attention,  food, sensational quantities  of  linen.  /Sensational/. You
could  practically buy  the United  States of America at  today’s prices
for  what that’s all costing. But you know what? I said, if he wants the
linen, let him have  the  linen.  Just let him have it. It’s  fine.  The
guy’s  earned it. He  can have  all  the  linen...he...wants. Just don’t
fuck with me is all. 
   ‘Now let me tell you, this guy has a nice life. A  /nice/ life. And I
think  that’s  what we  all  want, isn’t  it.  A  nice  life.  This  guy
certainly did.  And he didn’t know how to  have  it.  None of these guys
did. They’re just kind  of helpless in  the modern  world.  It’s kind of
tough for  them and I’m just trying  to help  out. Let  me tell you  how
naïve they are, and I mean /naïve/. 
   ‘My  wife, Cynthia, you’ve met  her,  and let me tell you, she is the
best. I tell you, my relationship with Cynthia is /so/ good --’ 
   ‘I don’t want to hear about your relationship with your wife.’ 
   ‘OK.  That’s fine. That’s absolutely fine.  I  just  think maybe it’s
worth  you  getting to know a few things. But whatever you want is fine.
OK. Cynthia’s in  advertising. You know that. She is a senior partner in
a major  agency. Major. They did some big campaign, really  big,  a  few
years back in which some  actor is playing a god in this commercial. And
he’s  endorsing something, I don’t know, a  soft drink, you know,  tooth
rot for kids. 
   And Odin  at this time is just a  down  and out. He’s living  on  the
streets.  He simply  can’t  get  anything  together,  because  he’s just
adapted not for this world. All that power,  but he  doesn’t know how to
make it work for him here, today. Now here’s the crazy part. 
   ‘Odin  sees this  commercial  on  the  television  and  he  thinks to
himself,  “Hey, I  could  do that, I’m a god.” He thinks maybe  he could
get paid  for  being in a  commercial. And you  know what that would be.
Pays even  less than the  United  States of America cost, you follow me?
Think  about it.  Odin, the  chief and fount  of all the power of all of
the Norse  gods, /thinks he might be able to  get paid  for being  in  a
television commercial to sell soft drinks/. 
   ‘And  this guy,  this /god/,  literally goes  out  and tries  to find
someone who’ll let him in  a TV  commercial.  /Pathetically/  naïve. But
also greedy -- let’s not forget greedy. 
   ‘Anyway,  he happens  to come to Cynthia’s  attention.  She’s just  a
lowly account executive at  the time,  doesn’t pay any attention, thinks
he’s  just  a whacko, but then she gets kind of fascinated by how odd he
is, and I get to see  him. And you know what? It  dawns on  us  he’s for
real. The guy is for real.  A real actual god  with the whole panoply of
divine powers. And not only  a god, but like, the main one. The  one all
the  others  depend on  for  their  power.  And  he  wants  to be  in  a
commercial. Let’s just say the word again shall we? A /commercial/. 
   ‘The idea was dumbfounding. Didn’t  the  guy know what he had? Didn’t
he realise what his power could get him? 
   ‘Apparently  not.  I have to tell you, this  was  the most astounding
moment in our lives. A...stoun...ding. Let me tell you,  Cynthia  and  I
have  always  known  that  we  were,  well,  special  people,  and  that
something  special  would  happen  to us,  and  here  it  was. Something
special. 
   ‘But look. We’re not  greedy. We don’t want  all that power, all that
wealth.   And   I  mean,   we’re  looking  at   the   world   here.  The
whole...fucking...world.  We  could own the world if  we wanted  to. But
who  wants  to own the world?  Think of the trouble. We don’t  even want
huge wealth, all  those lawyers accountants  to  deal with,  and let  me
tell you, /I’m/  a lawyer. OK, so you can hire people to look after your
lawyers and accountants for you,  but who are those people  going to be?
Just  more lawyers and accountants. And you know, we don’t even want the
responsibility for it all. It’s too much. 
   ‘So then  I  have this idea. It’s like  you  buy  a big property, and
then you sell on what you  don’t want. That way  you get what  you want,
and a  lot of other people get what  they want, only they get it through
you, and  they feel a  little  obligated  to you, and they  remember who
they got it through because they  sign  a piece of paper which  says how
obligated they feel to  you.  And  money  flows  back to pay  for our Mr
Odin’s very, very, very expensive private medical care. 
   ‘So we don’t have much, Mr  Gently. One or two  modestly nice houses.
One or  two modestly  nice  cars. We have a  very nice life.  Very, very
nice indeed. We  don’t need much because anything we need is always made
available to us,  it’s taken care of. All we demanded, and it was a very
reasonable demand in the circumstances, was that we didn’t want  to know
any  more about it. We  take our modest requirements  and we bow out. We
want nothing  more than absolute  peace and absolute quiet, and  a  nice
life because Cynthia’s sometimes a little nervous. OK. 
   ‘And then what happens this morning?  Right on our own doorstep. Pow.
It’s disgusting.  I mean it is really a disgusting  little  number.  And
you know how it happened? 
   ‘Here’s  how  it happened. It’s our  friend  Mr  Rag again,  and he’s
tried to be a clever tricky little voodoo  lawyer.  It’s so pathetic. He
has  fun  trying to waste my  time  with all his little tricks and games
and run-arounds, and  then he tries to faze me by presenting  me  with a
bill for his time. That’s  nothing.  It’s  work creation. All lawyers do
it.  OK. So I say, I’ll take your bill. I’ll take it, I don’t  care what
it is. You give me your bill and I’ll  see it’s taken care  of. It’s OK.
So he gives it to me. 
   ‘It’s  only later I  see it’s got this tricky kind of subtotal  thing
in it. So  what?  He’s trying to be clever.  He’s given me a hot potato.
Listen, the record business is full of hot potatoes.  You just  get them
taken care of. There  are always people happy to take care of things for
you when they want  to make their way up  the ladder.  If they’re worthy
of their  place  on the ladder, well,  they’ll  get it taken care of  in
return. You get a hot  potato,  you pass it on. I passed  it on. Listen,
there were a lot of  people who are  /very/ happy  to  get things  taken
care  of for  me. Hey, you  know? It was really funny seeing how far and
how  fast that particular potato got passed on. That told me a lot about
who was bright and  who was not. But then it lands up in my back garden,
and that’s  a  penalty  clause job I’m  afraid. The Woodshead stuff is a
/very/ expensive little number, and I  think your clients may have blown
it on  that particular score.  We  have the whip hand here.  We can just
cancel  this  whole  thing.  Believe  me,  I  have  everything  I  could
/possibly/ want now. 
   ‘But listen, Mr  Gently.  I  think you understand my  position. We’ve
been pretty frank with each  other and  I’ve felt good about that. There
are  certain  sensitivities  involved, of  course,  and  I’m also  in  a
position to be able  to make  a lot of things happen.  So perhaps we can
come to any one  of  a  number of possible  accommodations. Anything you
want, Mr Gently, it can be made to happen.’ 
   ‘Just to see you  dead, Mr  Draycott,’ said Dirk Gently, ‘just to see
you dead.’ 
   ‘Well fuck you, too.’ 
   Dirk Gently turned and  left the room and went to tell his new client
that he thought they might have a problem. 
   
   
[::: CHAPTER 31 :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::]
   
   A tittle  while  later a dark-blue BMW pulled  quietly  away from the
otherwise deserted forecourt of St  Pancras station and moved off up the
quiet streets. 
   Somewhat dejected,  Dirk  Gently put on  his  hat and left  his newly
acquired and newly  relinquished client who  said that  he  wished to be
alone now and maybe turn  into a rat or something like some other people
he could mention. 
   He closed the great doors behind him  and walked slowly out on to the
balcony  overlooking  the  great  vaulted  hall   of  gods  and  heroes,
Valhalla. He arrived just as the last few  stragglers of the revels were
fading  away,  presumably  to  emerge  at the same  moment in  the great
vaulted train shed of St  Pancras station. He stayed staring for a while
at the empty hall, in which the bonfires now were just fading embers. 
   It  then  took  the very slightest  flicker of  his head  for  him to
perform the same transition himself, and he found himself  standing in a
gusty and dishevelled corridor of the  empty Midland Grand Hotel. Out in
the  great dark concourse of St Pancras  station he saw  again the  last
stragglers from  Valhalla  shuffling away and  out into the cold streets
of  London to find benches that were designed not to be slept on, and to
try to sleep on them. 
   He  sighed  and tried to  find  his way out  of the derelict hotel, a
task that  proved more difficult than he anticipated, as immense and  as
dark and as labyrinthine as it  was.  He found at last the great winding
gothic staircase which  led all  the way down to the  huge arches of the
entrance  lobby, decorated  with carvings  of dragons  and griffins  and
heavy ornamental ironwork. The main front  entrance was locked as it had
been for years, and eventually Dirk found his  way  down a side corridor
to an  exit manned by a great  sweaty splodge of a man who guarded it at
night. He  demanded  to know  how Dirk had gained entrance  to the hotel
and  refused to  be satisfied by any of his  explanations. In the end he
had simply to allow Dirk to leave, since  there was little else he could
do. 
   Dirk crossed  from this entrance to the  entrance  into  the  station
booking hall,  and then into the station  itself. For a while he  simply
stood  there  looking around,  and then  he left  via  the  main station
entrance, and descended the  steps  which led down on to the St  Pancras
Road. As he  emerged on to  the street  he  was so surprised not  to  be
instantly swooped upon by a  passing eagle that he tripped and  stumbled
and  was  run  over  by  the  first  of  the  early morning’s motorcycle
couriers. 
   
   
[::: CHAPTER 32 :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::]
   
   With a  huge crash, Thor  surged  through  the wall at the far end of
the  great hall of Valhalla and stood ready to proclaim to the assembled
gods  and heroes that he  had finally managed to break through to Norway
and  had found a copy of the contract Odin had signed buried deep in the
side of a mountain, but he  couldn’t because they’d all gone  and  there
was no one there. 
   ‘There’s no one here,’ he  said to  Kate, releasing her from his huge
grip, ‘they’ve all gone.’ 
   He slumped in disappointment. 
   ‘Wh --’ said Kate. 
   ‘We’ll try  the old man’s  chambers,’ said Thor and hurled his hammer
up to the balcony, with themselves in tow. 
   He  stalked  through  the  great  chambers,  ignoring  Kate’s  pleas,
protests and general abuse. 
   He wasn’t there. 
   ‘He’s here  somewhere,’ said Thor angrily, trailing his hammer behind
him. 
   ‘We’ll go through  the world  divide,’ he said, and took hold of Kate
again. They flicked themselves through. 
   They were in a large bedroom suite in the hotel. 
   Litter and scraps of rotting carpet  covered  the floors, the windows
were grimy with years of neglect. Pigeon  droppings were everywhere, and
the peeling  paintwork made  it  look as if several  small  families  of
starfish had exploded on the walls. 
   There  was an abandoned trolleybed in the  middle  of  the  floor  in
which  an  old  man lay in beautifully laundered linen, weeping from his
one remaining eye. 
   ‘I found the  contract, you bastard,’ raged  Thor, waving  it at him.
‘I  found the deal  you did. You  /sold/  all our power to...to a lawyer
and  a...an advertiser and, and all sorts of other people. You stole our
power! You couldn’t steal all of  mine because I’m  too strong,  but you
kept  me bewildered  and confused, and made bad things happen every time
I  got angry. You  prevented me getting back  home  to Norway  by  every
method you could, because you knew I’d find /this/! You  and that poison
dwarf Toe Rag. You’ve been abusing and humiliating me for years,  and --
’ 
   ‘Yes, yes, we know all that,’ said Odin. 
   ‘Well...Good!’ 
   ‘Thor --’ said Kate. 
   ‘Well I’ve shaken all that off now!’ shouted Thor. 
   ‘Yes, I see --’ 
   ‘I went somewhere I could get good  and angry  in peace,  when I knew
you’d  be otherwise occupied and expecting  me to be  here,  and I had a
hell of a good shout  and  blew things up a bit, and I’m all right  now!
And I’m going to tear this up for a start!’ 
   He ripped  right through the contract, threw  the pieces  in the  air
and incinerated them with a look. 
   ‘Thor --’ said Kate. 
   ‘And I’m going to put right all the things you made happen so I’d  be
afraid  of  getting angry. The  poor  girl at the  airline check-in desk
that  got turned into  a  drink machine. Woof! Wham! She’s back! The jet
fighter that tried to  shoot me down  when I was flying to Norway! Woof!
Wham! It’s back! See, I’m back in control of myself!’ 
   ‘What  jet  fighter?’  asked  Kate.  ‘You haven’t told me about a jet
fighter.’ 
   ‘It tried to shoot me down over the North  Sea. We had a scrap and in
the heat of  the moment I,  well, I turned it into an  eagle,  and  it’s
been  bothering me ever  since. So now that’s dealt with.  Don’t look at
me like that.  I did what I could. I took care of his wife by fixing one
of those lottery  things. Look,’ he added  angrily, ‘all  this has  been
very difficult for me, you know. All right. What else?’ 
   ‘My table lamp,’ said Kate quietly. 
   ‘And Kate’s table lamp! It shall be a small  kitten  no  more!  Woof!
Wham! Thor speaks and it is so! What was that noise?’ 
   A ruddy glow was spreading across the London skyline. 
   ‘Thor, I think there’s something wrong with your father.’ 
   ‘I  should bloody well hope so. Oh. What’s wrong? Father? Are you all
right?’ 
   ‘I  have  been so very, very foolish  and unwise,’ wept Odin, ‘I have
been so wicked and evil, and --’ 
   ‘Yes,  well that’s  what I think, too,’ said Thor and  sat on the end
of his bed. ‘So what are we going to do?’ 
   ‘I  don’t think I  could live without my linen, and my Sister Bailey,
and...It’s been  so,  so, so long, and I’m so,  so  old. Toe Rag said  I
should  kill  you,  but  I...I  would  rather  have killed  myself.  Oh,
Thor...’ 
   ‘Oh,’ said Thor. ‘I see. Well.  I don’t know what to  do  now. Blast.
Blast everything.’ 
   ‘Thor --’ 
   ‘Yes, yes, what is it?’ 
   ‘Thor, it’s  very simple  what  you  do  about  your  father  and the
Woodshead,’ said Kate. 
   ‘Oh yes? What then?’ 
   ‘I’ll tell you on one condition.’ 
   ‘Oh really? And what’s that?’ 
   ‘That you tell me how many stones there are in Wales.’ 
   ‘What!’ exclaimed Thor in outrage.  ‘Away from me! That’s years of my
life you’re talking about!’ 
   Kate shrugged. 
   ‘No!’ said Thor.  ‘Anything but that! Anyway,’ he  added sullenly, ‘I
told you.’ 
   ‘No you didn’t.’ 
   ‘Yes I did.  I said I lost count somewhere in  Mid-Glamorgan. Well, I
was hardly going to start again, was I? Think, girl, think!’
   
   
[::: CHAPTER 33 :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::]
   
   Beating a path  through  the difficult territory to the north-east of
Valhalla -- a network of  paths that seemed to lead  only to other paths
and then  back  to the first  paths again for another try  --  went  two
figures,  one a  big,  stupid, violent  creature  with green eyes  and a
scythe which  hung  from  its  belt  and  often  seriously  impeded  its
progress, the other a small crazed creature who clung on to  the back of
the  bigger one, manically urging  him on  while  actually  impeding his
progress still further. 
   They attained at last a long, low,  smelly building into  which  they
hurried  shouting  for  horses.  The  old  stable  master  came forward,
recognised them and, having  heard  already of  their  disgrace,  was at
first disinclined  to help them on their way. The scythe flashed through
the  air and the stable  master’s head started upwards in surprise while
his body took an affronted step backwards,  swayed uncertainly, and then
for  lack of  any  further  instructions  to  the contrary  keeled  over
backwards in its own time. His head bounded into the hay. 
   His  assailants  hurriedly  lashed  up  two  horses  to  a  cart  and
clattered  away   out  of  the   stable  yard  and  along   the  broader
thoroughfare which led upwards to the north. 
   They made rapid  progress up the  road for a mile, Toe Rag urging the
horses on frantically with a long and cruel  whip. After a  few minutes,
however, the horses began to  slow down and to look about them uneasily.
Toe Rag  lashed them  all the harder, but they became more anxious still
then  suddenly lost  all control and  reared in terror, turning over the
cart  and  tipping  its  occupants  out  on the ground,  from which they
instantly sprang up in a rage. 
   Toe Rag screamed at the terrified horses and then, out  of the corner
of his eye, caught sight of what had so disturbed them. 
   It wasn’t so  terrifying. It  was  just  a large, white,  metal  box,
upturned on a pile of rubbish by the roadside and rattling itself. 
   The horses  were  rearing and trying to bolt away from the  big white
rattling thing but they were impossibly entangled in their  traces. They
were only working themselves  up  into a thrashing lather of panic.  Toe
Rag  quickly realised that there would  be no calming them until the box
was dealt with. 
   ‘Whatever  it is,’  he screeched  at  the green-eyed  creature, ‘kill
it!’ 
   Green-eye  unhooked  his scythe from his belt once more and clambered
up the pile of rubbish to where the box was rattling. He  kicked  it and
it  only rattled the more. He  got his foot behind it  and with a  heavy
thrust  shoved it away down the heap. The big white box slithered a foot
or so then turned over  and toppled to the ground. It rested there for a
moment and then a door,  finally freed, flew  open. The  horses screamed
in fear. 
   Toe  Rag  and his green-eyed  thug approached the thing  with worried
curiosity, then staggered back in  horror  as  a great  and powerful new
god erupted from its innards. 
   
   
[::: CHAPTER 34 :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::]
   
   The  following  afternoon,  at a comfortable distance from all  these
events, set at  a comfortable distance  from a well-proportioned  window
through which the  afternoon light  was  streaming, lay an elderly  one-
eyed man  in a white bed. A newspaper sat like a  half-collapsed tent on
the floor, where it had been hurled two minutes before. 
   The man  was awake  but not glad  to  be. His exquisitely frail hands
lay slightly curled on  the  pure  white linen sheets and quivered  very
faintly. 
   His name was variously  given as Mr  Odwin, or Wodin, or Odin. He was
-- is -- a god, and furthermore he was a confused and startled god. 
   He was confused and startled because of the report he had  just  been
reading  on the front page of the newspaper, which was that  another god
had been cutting  loose and making a nuisance of himself. It  didn’t say
so in so many  words  of course,  it  merely described what had happened
last night when  a missing jet fighter aircraft had mysteriously erupted
under  full power from out  of a  house  in  North London into which  it
could  not  conceivably  have  been  thought  to  have  fitted.  It  had
instantly lost its wings and gone into a  screaming dive and crashed and
exploded  in a  main road. The pilot had managed to eject during the few
seconds he  had  had  in  the air, and had landed,  shaken, bruised, but
otherwise unharmed, and babbling about  strange men with hammers  flying
over the North Sea. 
   Luckily, because of the  time  at which the inexplicable disaster had
occurred, the roads  were almost deserted, and apart from massive damage
to  property,  the only fatalities  to have  occurred  were  the  as yet
unidentified occupants of a car which  was thought to have been possibly
a BMW  and possibly blue, though because of the rather extreme nature of
the accident it was rather hard to tell. 
   He was very, very tired and did not want to  think  about it, did not
want  to think about last night, did not want to think of anything other
than  linen  sheets and  how  wonderful it was when Sister Bailey patted
them down around him as  she  had just now, just  five  minutes ago, and
again just ten minutes before that. 
   The American  girl, Kate something, came into his room. He wished she
would  just let him sleep.  She was going  on about something being  all
fixed  up.  She  congratulated  him  on  having  extremely  high   blood
pressure,  high  cholesterol  levels  and  a  very  dicky  heart,  as  a
consequence of which the hospital would be very  glad to accept him as a
lifelong patient in return for  his entire estate. They didn’t even care
to  know  what  his estate  was  worth,  because  it  would  clearly  be
sufficient to cover a stay as brief as his was likely to be. 
   She  seemed  to  expect  him  to  be  pleased, so  he nodded amiably,
thanked her vaguely and drifted, drifted happily off to sleep. 
   
   
[::: CHAPTER 35 :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::]
   
   The same  afternoon Dirk Gently  awoke,  also in  hospital, suffering
from mild concussion, scrapes and bruises and a broken leg.  He  had had
the greatest difficulty  in explaining, on admittance, that most of  his
injuries had been  caused  by a small boy and an eagle, and that really,
being  run  over  by  a  motorcycle  courier was  a  relatively  restful
experience since  it  mostly  involved lying  down a lot  and  not being
swooped on every two minutes. 
   He was kept  under  sedation -- in  other words, he slept -- for most
of the morning,  suffering terrible dreams in which Toe Rag and a green-
eyed,  scythe-bearing  giant made their  escape to the  north-east  from
Valhalla, where they were unexpectedly  accosted and consumed by a newly
created, immense Guilt God which  had  finally escaped from what  looked
suspiciously like an upturned refrigerator on a skip. 
   He was relieved to be woken at last from this  by  a cheery, ‘Oh it’s
you, is it? You nicked my book.’ 
   He opened  his eyes and was greeted by  the sight of Sally Mills, the
girl  he had been  violently  accosted  by the previous day in the café,
for no  better  reason than that  he had,  prior to  nicking  her  book,
nicked her coffee. 
   ‘Well, I’m glad to  see you took  my  advice and came in to have your
nose properly attended to,’ she said as she fussed  around  him. ‘Pretty
roundabout  way  you  seem to have taken but  you’re here and that’s the
main thing. You caught up with the girl  you were interested in did you?
Oddly enough, you’re in the  very bed that she  was in.  If you see  her
again, perhaps you could give her this  pizza which she arranged to have
delivered  before  checking  herself  out.  It’s  all  cold now, but the
courier did insist that she was very adamant it should be delivered. 
   ‘I  don’t mind you nicking the book, really, though. I don’t know why
I buy  them  really,  they’re not very  good, only everyone always does,
don’t  they? Somebody told me there’s  a rumour  he  had entered  into a
pact with the devil or something. I think that’s nonsense, though  I did
hear another  story about  him which I much preferred.  Apparently  he’s
always  having  these  mysterious  deliveries of  chickens  to his hotel
rooms, and  no one dares  to  ask why or even guess what it is he  wants
them for, because nobody  ever sees a single  scrap of them again. Well,
I met somebody who  knows exactly what he wants them for. The somebody I
met once had  the job  of  secretly smuggling the chickens straight back
out  of his rooms again. What Howard Bell gets out of it is a reputation
for being a very strange and demonic  man and everybody  buys his books.
Nice work if  you can get it is what I say.  Anyway, I expect  you don’t
want to have  me nattering to you alt afternoon, and even if you do I’ve
got  better things to do. Sister says you’ll probably be discharged this
evening so you can go to  your own home and sleep in your own bed, which
I’m sure  you’ll much prefer. Anyway, hope  you feel  better,  here’s  a
couple of newspapers.’ 
   Dirk took the papers, glad to be left alone at last. 
   He first turned  to see what The Great Zaganza  had to say about  his
day.  The  Great  Zaganza  said,  ‘You  are  very  fat  and  stupid  and
persistently wear a ridiculous hat which you should be ashamed of.’ 
   He  grunted  slightly  to  himself  about  this,  and turned  to  the
horoscope in the other paper. 
   It said, ‘Today is a day to enjoy home comforts.’ 
   Yes,  he thought,  he  would be glad  to get back  home. He was still
strangely  relieved  about getting  rid  of  his old  fridge and  looked
forward  to  enjoying a new phase of fridge  ownership with the spanking
new model currently sitting in his kitchen at home. 
   Then was the  eagle  to think  about, but he would worry  about  that
later, when he got home. 
   He turned to  the front  page to  see  if  there was  any interesting
news. 
========================================================================
