Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company The New York TimesApril 30, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - FinalSection 4; Page 5; Column 2; Week in Review Desk746 wordsThe Nation;The Conspiracy That Never EndsBy George JohnsonWHILE most of the world waited for news of the official investigation intothe Oklahoma bombing, callers and talk show hosts on World Wide ChristianRadio, the Nashville shortwave station that has become the shrill voice ofthe far right, had it all figured out: the Federal Building was destroyed aspart of a plot by the United States Government, acting on behalf of a secretinternational cabal, the New World Order, whose symbol, the cold staring eyein the pyramid, mocks Americans from the back of every one dollar bill.Within days, the bombing had been tightly woven into the sprawlingconspiracy theories that have obsessed some Americans since the beginning ofthe Republic. The historian Richard Hofstadter coined the phrase "theparanoid style in American politics" to describe this pathological worldview in which history is a Manichean struggle between the forces of lightand of darkness. The conspiratorial fantasies are not simply an expressionof inchoate fear. There is a shape, an architecture, to the paranoia.Rule No. 1: The conspirators are internationalist in their sympathies. Inthis century the main targets of conspiracy theories have been Jews,depicted as people whose loyalty to fellow Jews makes them endemicallyantipatriotic, and international Communism. The United Nations is suspect,as is the Trilateral Commission, the Council on Foreign Relations, Interpoland even the Red Cross because they supposedly place international agendasabove patriotic concerns. In the 19th century, the chief conspirators weresaid to be the Vatican and the Freemasons. In the mind of today's politicalparanoiacs, which include some militia members, followers of the LibertyLobby (the Holocaust-is-a-myth crowd) and the Ku Klux Klan, all these groupsare mushed together into the New World Order, or One World Government.The first rule is of more than academic historical interest because of RuleNo. 2: In a conspiracy theory, nothing is ever discarded. Right-wing mailorder bookstores still sell the "Protocols of the Elders of Zion," theanti-Semitic fantasy hatched in Russia a century ago. Another big seller is"Proofs of a Conspiracy, " a 1797 book reprinted by the John Birch Society,which fueled speculation that a Freemasonic group called the Order of theIlluminati plotted with the Jeffersonians to turn over the fledging UnitedStates to followers of French Enlightenment philosophy -- the 18th centuryequivalent of secular humanism.This brings us to Rule No. 3: Seeming enemies are actually secret friends.As evil as the Communists, in the right-wing mind, are the Rockefellers andinternational bankers (often a synonym for Jews). Through the lens of theconspiracy theorists, capitalists and Communists work hand in hand.To what end? That's Rule No. 4: The takeover by the international godlessgovernment will be ignited by the collapse of the economic system. In anelaborate decades-long check-kiting scheme since the dollar was removed fromthe gold standard, the Federal Reserve has been creating money out of thinair. Once the conspirators give the word, the bankers will yank out the rugfrom this house of cards and your money will be worthless.As a sign that the conspirators have taken over the currency, they hadprinted on the back a Freemasonic symbol: the all-seeing eye of theenlightened ones perched atop the pyramid. And there, under the emblem, istheir name: Novus Ordo Seclorum.Finally, Rule No. 5: It's all spelled out in the Bible. For those with afundamentalist bent, the New World Order or One World Government is noneother than the international kingdom of the Antichrist, described in theBook of Revelation. Revelation also speaks of the "mark of the beast," asymbol of the satanic leader that will be imprinted on everyone's foreheadand right hand. Fundamentalist preachers like Hal Lindsey have popularizedthe notion that the mark of the beast is the zebra-striped Universal ProductCode, which will be tattooed on everyone by laser to increase the acuity ofthe panoptic big eye.We may never know what went through the real conspirators' minds when, asinvestigators say, they rented a truck, packed it full of fertilizer andfuel oil, and ignited it where it would do the most harm. But if they hungout at militia meetings, or even just tuned in occasionally to WWCR, theywould have been exposed to this kind of thinking, over and over and overagain.