                             Friedrich NietzscheGod is a gross answer, an indelicacy against us thinkers -- at bottom merelya gross prohibition for us: you shall not think! \par \par -Nietzsche}"Believe me! The secret of reaping the greatest fruitfulness and thegreatest enjoyment from life is to live dangerously !"- Friedrich Nietzsche,"Morality is the herd-instinct in the individual." - Friedrich Nietzsche"The Christian resolution to find the world ugly and bad has made the worldugly and bad." - Friedrich NietzscheDestiny of Christianity. -- Christianity came into existence in order tolighten the heart; but now it has first to burden the heart so as afterwardsto be able to lighten it. Consequently it shall perish. ( from Nietzsche'sHuman, all too Human, s.119, R.J. Hollingdale transl.)But in the end one also has to understand that the needs that religion hassatisfied and philosophy is now supposed to satisfy are not immutable; theycan be weakened and exterminated. Consider, for example, that Christiandistress of mind that comes from sighing over ones inner depravity and carefor ones salvation - all concepts originating in nothing but errors ofreason and deserving, not satisfaction, but obliteration. ( from Nietzsche'sHuman, all too Human, s.27, R.J. Hollingdale transl. }Historical refutation as the definitive refutation.-- In former times, onesought to prove that there is no God - today one indicates how the beliefthat there is a God arose and how this belief acquired its weight andimportance: a counter-proof that there is no God thereby becomessuperfluous.- When in former times one had refuted the 'proofs of theexistence of God' put forward, there always remained the doubt whetherbetter proofs might not be adduced than those just refuted: in those daysatheists did not know how to make a clean sweep. (from Nietzsche'sDaybreak,s. 95, R.J. Hollingdale transl. }What distinguishes us [scientists] from the pious and the believers is notthe quality but the quantity of belief and piety; we are contented withless. But if the former should challenge us: then be contented and appear tobe contented! - then we might easily reply: 'We are, indeed, not among theleast contented. You, however, if your belief makes you blessed then appearto be blessed! Your faces have always been more injurious to your beliefthan our objections have! If these glad tidings of your Bible were writtenon your faces, you would not need to insist so obstinately on the authorityof that book... As things are, however, all your apologies for Christianityhave their roots in your lack of Christianity; with your defence plea youinscribe your own bill of indictment. (from Nietzsche's Assorted Opinionsand Maxims,s. 98, R.J. Hollingdale transl. }Other fears, other securities.-- Christianity had brought into life a quitenovel and limitless perilousness, and therewith quite novel securities,pleasures, recreations and evaluations of all things. Our century deniesthis perilousness, and does so with a good conscience: and yet it continuesto drag along with it the old habits of Christian security, Christianenjoyment, recreation, evaluation! It even drags them into its noblest artsand philosophies! How worn out and feeble, how insipid and awkward, howarbitrarily fanatical and, above all, how insecure all this must appear, nowthat the fearful antithesis to it, the omnipresent fear of the Christian forhis eternal salvation, has been lost. (from Nietzsche's Daybreak,s. 57, R.J.Hollingdale transl. }Doubt as sin.-- Christianity has done its utmost to close the circle anddeclared even doubt to be sin. One is supposed to be cast into beliefwithout reason, by a miracle, and from then on to swim in it as in thebrightest and least ambiguous of elements: even a glance towards land, eventhe thought that one perhaps exists for something else as well as swimming,even the slightest impulse of our amphibious nature- is sin! And notice thatall this means that the foundation of belief and all reflection on itsorigin is likewise excluded as sinful. What is wanted are blindness andintoxication and an eternal song over the waves in which reason has drowned.(from Nietzsche's Daybreak,s. 89, R.J. Hollingdale transl. }The compassionate Christian.-- The reverse side of Christian compassion forthe suffering of one's neighbor is a profound suspicion of all the joy ofone's neighbor, of his joy in all that he wants to do and can. (fromNietzsche's Daybreak,s. 80, R.J. Hollingdale transl. }The despairing.-- Christianity possesses the hunters instinct for all thosewho can by one means or another be brought to despair - of which only aportion of mankind is capable. It is constantly on their track, it lies inwait for them. Pascal attempted the experiment of seeing whether, with theaid of the most incisive knowledge, everyone could not be brought todespair: the experiment miscarried, to his twofold despair. (fromNietzsche's Daybreak,s. 64, R.J. Hollingdale transl. }What a crude intellect is good for.-- The Christian church is anencyclopaedia of prehistoric cults and conceptions of the most diverseorigin, and that is why it is so capable of proselytizing: it always could,and it can still go wherever it pleases and it always found, and alwaysfinds something similar to itself to which it can adapt itself and graduallyimpose upon it a Christian meaning. It is not what is Christian in it, butthe universal heathen character of its usages, which has favored the spreadof this world-religion; its ideas, rooted in both the Jewish and theHellenic worlds, have from the first known how to raise themselves abovenational and racial niceties and exclusiveness as though these were merelyprejudices. One may admire this power of causing the most various elementsto coalesce, but one must not forget the contemptible quality that adheresto this power: the astonishing crudeness and self-satisfiedness of thechurch's intellect during the time it was in process of formation, whichpermitted it to accept any food and to digest opposites like pebbles. (fromNietzsche's Daybreak,s. 70, R.J. Hollingdale transl. }The everyday Christian. -- If the Christian dogmas of a revengeful God,universal sinfulness, election by divine grace and the danger of eternaldamnation were true, it would be a sign of weak-mindedness and lack ofcharacter not to become a priest, apostle or hermit and, in fear andtrembling, to work solely on one's own salvation; it would be senseless tolose sight of ones eternal advantage for the sake of temporal comfort. If wemay assume that these things are at any rate believed true, then theeveryday Christian cuts a miserable figure; he is a man who really cannotcount to three, and who precisely on account of his spiritual imbecilitydoes not deserve to be punished so harshly as Christianity promises topunish him. (from Nietzsche's Human, all too Human, s.116, R.J. Hollingdaletransl. }The persecutor of God. -- Paul thought up the idea and Calvin rethought it,that for innumerable people damnation has been decreed from eternity, andthat this beautiful world plan was instituted to reveal the glory of God:heaven and hell and humanity are thus supposed to exist - to satisfy thevanity of God! What cruel and insatiable vanity must have flared in the soulof the man who thought this up first, or second. Paul has remained Saulafter all - the persecutor of God. (from Nietzsche's The Wanderer and hisShadow, R.J. Hollingdale transl. }The first Christian. All the world still believes in the authorship of the"Holy Spirit" or is at least still affected by this belief: when one opensthe Bible one does so for "edification."... That it also tells the story ofone of the most ambitious and obtrusive of souls, of a head as superstitiousas it was crafty, the story of the apostle Paul--who knows this , except afew scholars? Without this strange story, however, without the confusionsand storms of such a head, such a soul, there would be no Christianity...\par That the ship of Christianity threw overboard a good deal of its Jewishballast, that it went, and was able to go, among the pagans--that was due tothis one man, a very tortured, very pitiful, very unpleasant man, unpleasanteven to himself. He suffered from a fixed idea--or more precisely, from afixed, ever-present, never-resting question: what about the Jewish law? andparticularly the fulfillment of this law? In his youth he had himself wantedto satisfy it, with a ravenous hunger for this highest distinction which theJews could conceive - this people who were propelled higher than any otherpeople by the imagination of the ethically sublime, and who alone succeededin creating a holy god together with the idea of sin as a transgressionagainst this holiness. Paul became the fanatical defender of this god andhis law and guardian of his honor; at the same time, in the struggle againstthe transgressors and doubters, lying in wait for them, he becameincreasingly harsh and evilly disposed towards them, and inclined towardsthe most extreme punishments. And now he found that--hot-headed, sensual,melancholy, malignant in his hatred as he was-- he was himself unable tofulfill the law; indeed, and this seemed strangest to him, his extravagantlust to domineer provoked him continually to transgress the law, and he hadto yield to this thorn. \par Is it really his "carnal nature" that makes himtransgress again and again? And not rather, as he himself suspected later,behind it the law itself, which must constantly prove itself unfulfillableand which lures him to transgression with irresistable charm? But at thattime he did not yet have this way out. He had much on his conscience - hehints at hostility, murder, magic, idolatry, lewdness, drunkenness, andpleasure in dissolute carousing - and... moments came when he said tohimself:"It is all in vain; the torture of the unfulfilled law cannot beovercome."... The law was the cross to which he felt himself nailed: how hehated it! how he searched for some means to annihilate it--not to fulfill itany more himself! \par And finally the saving thought struck him,... "It isunreasonable to persecute this Jesus! Here after all is the way out; here isthe perfect revenge; here and nowhere else I have and hold the annihilatorof the law!"... Until then the ignominious death had seemed to him the chiefargument against the Messianic claim of which the new doctrine spoke: butwhat if it were necessary to get rid of the law? \par The tremendousconsequences of this idea, of this solution of the riddle, spin before hiseyes; at one stroke he becomes the happiest man; the destiny of theJews--no, of all men--seems to him to be tied to this idea, to this secondof its sudden illumination; he has the thought of thoughts, the key of keys,the light of lights; it is around him that all history must revolvehenceforth. For he is from now on the teacher of the annihilation of thelaw... \par This is the first Christian, the inventor of Christianity. Untilthen there were only a few Jewish sectarians. (from Nietzsche's Daybreak,s.68, Walter Kaufmann transl. }Speaking in a parable.--A Jesus Christ was possible only in a Jewishlandscape--I mean one over which the gloomy and sublime thunder cloud of thewrathful Yahweh was brooding continually. Only here was the rare and suddenpiercing of the gruesome and perpetual general day-night by a single ray ofthe sun experienced as if it were a miracle of "love" and the ray ofunmerited "grace." Only here could Jesus dream of his rainbow and his ladderto heaven on which God descended to man. Everywhere else good weather andsunshine were considered the rule and everyday occurrences. (fromNietzsche's The Gay Science, s.137, Walter Kaufmann transl }Blind pupils. -- As long as a man knows very well the strength andweaknesses of his teaching, his art, his religion, its power is stillslight. The pupil and apostle who, blinded by the authority of the masterand by the piety he feels toward him, pays no attention to the weaknesses ofa teaching, a religion, and soon usually has for that reason more power thanthe master. The influence of a man has never yet grown great without hisblind pupils. To help a perception to achieve victory often means merely tounite it with stupidity so intimately that the weight of the latter alsoenforces the victory of the former. (from Nietzsche's Human, all too Human,s.122, R.J. Hollingdale transl. }Change of Cast. -- As soon as a religion comes to dominate it has as itsopponents all those who would have been its first disciples. (fromNietzsche's Human, all too Human, s.118, R.J. Hollingdale transl. }Christianity was from the beginning, essentially and fundamentally, life'snausea and disgust with life, merely concealed behind, masked by, dressed upas, faith in "another" or "better" life. (from Nietzsche's The Birth ofTragedy, p.23, Walter Kaufmann transl. }Christianity as antiquity.-- When we hear the ancient bells growling on aSunday morning we ask ourselves: Is it really possible! This, for a jew,crucified two thousand years ago, who said he was God's son? The proof ofsuch a claim is lacking. Certainly the Christian religion is an antiquityprojected into our times from remote prehistory; and the fact that the claimis believed - whereas one is otherwise so strict in examining pretensions -is perhaps the most ancient piece of this heritage. A god who begetschildren with a mortal woman; a sage who bids men work no more, have no morecourts, but look for the signs of the impending end of the world; a justicethat accepts the innocent as a vicarious sacrifice; someone who orders hisdisciples to drink his blood; prayers for miraculous interventions; sinsperpetrated against a god, atoned for by a god; fear of a beyond to whichdeath is the portal; the form of the cross as a symbol in a time that nolonger knows the function and ignominy of the cross -- how ghoulishly allthis touches us, as if from the tomb of a primeval past! Can one believethat such things are still believed? (from Nietzsche's Human, all too Human,s.405, R.J. Hollingdale transl. }"The pianist who performs the work of a master will have played best when hemakes his listeners forget the master, \par when it seems as though he isrelating a tale from his own life or is experiencing something at that verymoment. -Nietzsche"I do not by any means know atheism as a result; even less as an event: itis a matter of course with me, from instinct. \par I am too inquisitive, tooquestionable, too exuberant to stand for any gross answer. (God is a grossanswer, an indelicacy against us thinkers -- at bottom merely a grossprohibition for us: you shall not think!) -Nietzsche"Little prigs and three-quarter madmen may have the conceit that the laws ofnature are constantly broken for their sakes.""In Christianity neither morality nor religion come into contact withreality at any point.""You who hate the Jews so, why did you adopt their religion?""I call Christianity the *one* great curse, the *one* great intrinsicdepravity, the *one* great instinct for revenge fo r which no expedient issufficiently poisonous, secret, subterranean, *petty* -- I call it the *one*mortal blemish of mankind.""Belief means not wanting to know what is true.""Though I drew this conclusion, now it draws me.""The belief that the world as it ought to be is, really exists, is a beliefof the unproductive who do not des ire to create a world as it ought to be.It is a measure of the degree of strength of will to what extent one can dowithout meaning in things, to what extent one can endure to live in ameaningless world because one organizes a small part of it oneself." All thebeauty and sublimity we have bestowed upon... imaginary things I willreclaim as the property and product of man... with what regal liberality hehas lavished gifts upon things so as to impoverish himself and make himselffeel wretched!""It is a matter of course with me, from instinct. I am too inquisitive, too*questionable, too exuberant to stand for any gross answer. God is a grossanswer, an indelicacy against us thinkers - at bottom merely a grossprohibition for us: you shall not think!""The advent of the Christian God, as the maximum god attained so far, was...accompanied by the maximum feeling of guilty indebtedness on Earth.Presuming we gradually enter upon the reverse course, there is no smallprobability that with the irresistible decline of faith in the Christiangod, there is now a considerable decline in mankind's feeling of guilt;indeed, the prospect cannot be dismissed that the complete and definitivevictory of Atheism might free mankind of this whole feeling of guiltyin-debtedness towards its origin... Atheism and a kind of second innocencebelong together.""A casual stroll through the lunatic asylum shows that faith does not proveanything.""Have you noticed there are no interesting people in heaven?-Just a hint to the girls as to where they can find their salvation.""Mystical explanations are considered deep. The truth is that they are noteven superficial.""One is *not* free to become a Christian. One must be sick enough for it.""For let us not underestimate the Christian: the Christian, *false to pointof innocence*, is far above the ape--regarding Christians, a well-knowntheory of descent becomes a mere compliment.""The 'evangel' died on the cross. What has been called 'evangel' from thatmoment was actually the opposite of that which *he* had lived: '*ill*tidings,' a *dysangel*.""This indictment of Christianity I will write on all walls, wherever thereare walls--I have letters to make even the blind see.""One does well to put on gloves when reading the New Testament. Theproximity of so much uncleanliness almost forces one to do this.""However un-Christian this may sound, I am not even predisposed againstmyself.""Assuming that he believes at all, the everday Christian is a pitifulfigure, a man who really cannot count up to three, and who besides,precisely because of his mental incompetence, would not deserve such apunishment as Christianity promises him.""Two great European narcotics, alcohol and Christianity.""The Christian faith from the beginning, is sacrifice: the sacrifice of allfreedom, all price, all self-confidence of spirit; it is at the same timesubjection, self-derision, and self-mutilation...""The surest way to corrupt a youth is to instruct him to hold in higheresteem those who think alike than those who think differently.""Faith, indeed, has up to the present not been able to move realmountains... But it can put mountains where there are none.""What a theologian feels as true, must be false: one has therein almost acriterion of truth.""War to the death against depravity--depravity is Christianity.""It is regrettable that a Dostoyevski did not live near this mostinteresting of all decadents--I mean someone who would have known how tosense the very stirring charm of such a mixture of the sublime, the sickly,and the childlike.""The god on the cross is a curse on life, a signpost to seek redemption fromlife; Dionysus cut to pieces is a *promise* of life: it will be eternallyreborn and return again from destruction.""...it is all over with priests and gods when man becomes scientific. Moral:science is the forbidden as such -- it alone is forbidden. Science is thefirst sin, seed of all sin, the original sin. This alone is morality. 'Thoushalt not know' -- the rest follows.""It was the sick and dying who despised the body and the earth and inventedthe things of heaven and the redeeming drops of blood: but even these sweetand dismal poisons they took from the body and the earth!""Who is more godless than I, that I may rejoice in his teachings?""The noble soul has reverence for itself""Your soul will be dead even before your body: fear nothing further.""Is man one of God's blunders, or is God one of man's blunders?"". . . an absurd problem came to the surface: 'How COULD God permit thatcrucifixion of Jesus Christ]!' . . . the deranged reason of the littlecommunity found quite a frightfully absurd answer: God gave his Son forforgiveness, as a SACRIFICE . . . The SACRIFICE FOR GUILT, and just in itsmost repugnant and barbarous form -- the sacrifice of the innocent for thesins of the guilty! What horrifying heathenism!""The Christian resolution to find the world ugly and bad has made the worldugly and bad.""Only under two suppositions does prayer- that custom of earlier ages thathas not yet completely died out- make any sense: it would have to bepossible to induce or convert the divinity to a certain course of action,and the person praying would himself have to know best what he needed, whatwas truly desirable for him. Both presuppositions, assumed true andestablished by custom in all other religions, are however denied preciselyby Christianity; if it nonetheless adheres to prayer in the face of itsbelief in an omniscient and all-provident rationality in God which rendersprayer at bottom senseless and, indeed, blasphemous- in this it once againdemonstrates its admirable serpent cunning; for a clear commandment 'ThouShalt Not Pray' would have led Christians into unchristianity throughboredom.""Christianity has done it's utmost to close the circle and declare evendoubt to be a sin. One is supposed to be cast into belief without reason, bya miracle, and from then on to swim in it as in the brightest and leastambiguous of elements: even a glance towards land, even the thought that oneperhaps exists for something else as well as swimming, even the slightestimpulse of our amphibious nature - is sin! And notice that all this meansthat the foundation of belief and all reflection on it's origin is likewiseexcluded as sinful. What is wanted are blindness and intoxication and aneternal song over the waves in which reason has drowned.""Jesus died too soon. If he had lived to my age he would have repudiated hisdoctrine.""Once the sin against God was the greatest sin; but God died, and thesesinners died with him. To sin against the earth is now the most dreadfulthing, and to esteem the entrails of the unknowable higher than the meaningof the earth.""For the old gods, after all, things came to an end long ago; and verily,they had a good gay godlike end. They did not end in a "twilight," thoughthis lie is told. Instead: one day they *laughed* themselves to death. Thathappened when the most godless word issued from one of the godsthemselves--the word: "There is one god. Thou shalt have no other god beforeme!" An old grimbeard of a god, a jealous one, thus forgot himself. And thenall the gods laughed and rocked on their chairs and cried, "Is not just thisgodlike that there are gods but no God?" He that has ears to hear, let himhear!"Everywhere the voice of those who preach death is heard; and the earth iffull of those to whom one must preach death. Or, "eternal life"---that isthe same to me, if only they pass away quickly.""Christianity came into existence in order to lighten the heart; but now ithas to burden the heart first, in order to lighten it afterward.Consequently it will perish.""An agreeable opinion is accepted as true: this is the proof by pleasure or,as the church says, the proof by strength), that all religions are so proudof, whereas they ought to be ashamed. If the belief did not make us happy,it would not be believed: how little must it then be worth!""Thus a certain false psychology, a certain kind of fantasy in interpretingmotives and experiences, is the necessary prerequisite for becoming aChristian and experiencing the need for redemption. With the insight intothis aberration of reason and imagination, one ceases to be a Christian.""One should not go into church if one wants to breathe pure air.""The last Christian died on the cross.""I cannot believe in a God who wants to be praised all the time.""There is not enough religion in the world to destroy the world'sreligions.""Man is the cruelest animal. At tragedies, bullfights, and crucifixions hehas so far felt best on earth; and when he invente d hell for himself,behold, that was his very heaven.""Here the ways of men part: if you wish to strive for peace of soul andpleasure, then believe; if you wish to be a devotee of truth, then inquire.""Have you not heard of that madman who lit a lantern in the bright morninghours, ran to the market place and cried incessantly: 'I am looking for God!I am looking for God!' - As many of those who did not believe in God werestanding together there he excited considerable laughter. Have you lost himthen? said one. Did he lose his way like a child? said another. Or is hehiding? Is he afraid of us? Has he gone on a voyage? or emigrated? thus theyshouted and laughed. The madman jumped into their midst and pierced themwith his eyes. "Whither is God?" he cried; "I will tell you. WE HAVE KILLEDHIM - you and I. All of us are his murderers. But how did we do this? Howcould we drink up the sea? Who gave us the sponge to wipe away the entirehorizon? What were we doing when we unchained this earth from its sun?Whither is it moving now? W hither are we moving? Away from all suns? Are wenot plunging continually? Backward, sideward, foreward, in all direction? Isthere still any up or down? Are we not straying as through an infinitenothing? Do we not feel the breath of empty space? Has it not become colder?Is not night continually closing in on us? Do we not need to light candlesin the morning? Do we hear nothing as yet of the noise of the gravediggerswho are burying God? Do we smell nothing as yet of the divine decomposition?Gods, too, decompose. God is dead. God remains dead. And we have killedhim.""The certain prospect of death could sweeten every life with a precious andfragrant drop of levity--and now you strange apothecary souls have turned itinto an ill-tasting drop of poison that makes the whole of life repulsive.""Christianity makes suffering contagious.""A certain sense of cruelty towards oneself and others is Christian; hatredof those who think differently; the will to persecute. Mortal hostilityagainst the masters of the earth, against the 'noble', that is alsoChristian. Hatred of mind, of pride, courage, freedom, libertinage of mind,is Christian; hatred of the sense, of the joy of the senses, of joy ingeneral is Christian.""But in the end one also has to understand that the needs that religion hassatisfied and philosophy is now supposed to satisfy are not immutable; theycan be weakened and exterminated. Consider, for example, that Christiandistress of mind that comes from sighing over ones inner depravity and carefor ones salvation - all concepts originating in nothing but errors ofreason and deserving, not satisfaction, but obliteration.""At the deathbed of Christianity.-- Really unreflective people are nowinwardly without Christianity, and the more moderate and reflective peopleof the intellectual middle class now possess only an adapted, that is to saymarvelously simplified Christianity. A god who in his love arrangeseverything in a manner that in the end will be best for us; a god who givesto us and takes from us our virtue and our happiness, so that as a whole allis meet and fit and there is no reason for us to take life sadly, let aloneexclaim against it; in short, resignation and modest demands elevated togodhead - that is the best and most vital thing that still remains ofChristianity. But one should notice that Christianity has thus crossed overinto a gentle moralism: it is not so much 'God, freedom and immortality'that have remained, as benevolence and decency of disposition, and thebelief that in the whole universe too benevolence and decency of dispositionprevail: it is the euthanasia of Christianity.""The Christian concept of God is one of the most corrupt conceptions of Godarrived on earth; perhaps it even represents the low-water mark in thedescending development of the God type. God degenerated to the contradictionof life,* instead of being its transfiguration and eternal Yes! In God adeclaration of hostility towards life, nature, and the will to life! God isthe formula for every calumny of 'this world', for every lie about the 'nextworld!' In God nothingess defied, the will to nothingness sanctified . . ."In Christianity the instincts of the subjugated and oppressed come to thefore: here the lowest classes seek their salvation. The causistry of sin,self-criticism, the inquisition of the conscience, are pursued as a PASTIME,as a remedy for boredom; the emotional reaction to one who has POWER, called'God,' is constantly sustained (by means of prayer); and what is c onsideredunattainable, a gift, "grace." Public acts are precluded; the hiding-place,the darkened room, is Christian. The body is despised, hygiene repudiated assensuality; the church even opposes cleanliness (the first Christian measureafter the expulsion of the Moors was the closing of the public baths, ofwhich there were two hundred and seventy in Cordova alone). Christian too isa certain sense of cruelty against oneself and against others; hatred of allwho think differently; the will to persecute. Gloomy and excitingconceptions predominate; the most highly desired states, designated with thehighest names, are epileptoid; the diet is so chosen as to favor morbidphenomena and overstimulate the nerves. Christian too is mortal enmityagainst the lords of the earth, against the 'noble'-- along with a sly,secret rivalry (one leaves them the 'body,' one wants ONLY the 'soul').Christian, finally, is the hatred of the SPIRIT, of pride, courage, freedom,liberty of the spirit; Christian is the hatred of the SENSES, of joy in thesenses, of joy itself.""Buddha says: 'Do not flatter your benefactor!' Repeat this saying in aChristian church: right away it clears the air of everything Christian!""God is a thought who makes crooked all that is straight."God is dead: but considering the state Man is in, there will perhaps becaves, for ages yet, in which his shadow will be shown. [And Nietzsche adds]-And we-- we still have to vanquish his shadow.